Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci.
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/shpsc

Mining data, gathering variables and recombining information:
the ﬂexible architecture of epidemiological studies
Susanne Bauer
Medical Museion, University of Copenhagen, Fredericiagade 18, DK-1310 Copenhagen, Denmark

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 12 May 2007
Received in revised form 20 May 2008

Keywords:
Risk factor epidemiology
Breast cancer aetiology
Collecting
Data mining
Biobanks
Population registries

a b s t r a c t
Since the second half of the twentieth century, biomedical research has made increasing use of epidemiological methods to establish empirical evidence on a population level. This paper is about practices with
data in epidemiological research, based on a case study in Denmark. I propose an epistemology of record
linkage that invites exploration of epidemiological studies as heterogeneous assemblages. Focusing on
data collecting, sampling and linkage, I examine how data organisation and processing become productive beyond the context of their collection. The case study looks at how a local population database established in 1976 to investigate possibilities for the prevention of cardiovascular disease is used thirty years
later to test hypotheses on the aetiology of breast cancer. For two breast cancer investigations based on
the same core data set, I follow the underlying record linkage practice and describe how research objects
such as molecular markers become relevant with respect to public health through information networking. Epidemiological association studies function as tools that performatively enrol different contexts into
statistical risk estimation, thereby conﬁguring options for research as well as for clinical testing and public health policy.
Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

When citing this paper, please use the full journal title Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences

1. Introduction
Biomedical research in the late twentieth century has made
increasing use of epidemiological methods to establish empirical
evidence about health risks on a population level. This paper is
about data collecting and about the data work that underlies epidemiological assessments. It describes a local database established
in the 1970s to investigate prevention possibilities for cardiovascular disease and how it came to inform the molecular aetiology of
breast cancer three decades later.
A threefold increase in breast cancer risk associated with a
mutation in the ‘CHEK2 gene’ was reported on 31 July 2006

by a research group from Copenhagen.1 Local media accounts
embraced the study as conﬁrmation of a ‘third breast cancer
gene’ and announced signiﬁcant implications for treatment and
testing.2 The ﬁndings from epidemiological research resulted in
a broad media response that echoed biomedical promises. In an
earlier breast cancer study, the same local data had been used
to investigate the aetiological contribution to breast cancer of
the environmental exposure to organochlorines (Høyer et al.,
1998); a reanalysis a few years later additionally took a molecular
marker (p53) into account (Høyer et al., 2002). Upon ﬁrst publication of the data in 1998, the association of organochlorines
and breast cancer was broadly discussed in the local media with

E-mail address: sbau@sund.ku.dk
See Weischer et al. (2007, published electronically on 31 July 2006). The CHEK2 gene has been discussed in relation to cancer risk since 1999. See Bell et al. (1999) for the ﬁrst
description of CHEK2 (then chk2) in people with Li Fraumeni syndrome. More detail on the scientiﬁc debate is provided below.
2
After the scientiﬁc publication in the Journal of Clinical Oncology, the research result immediately made its way into Danish media: on 1 August 2006, among other local
newspapers such as Jyllands-Posten and The Copenhagen Post, Berlingske Tidende reported that a new ‘breast cancer gene’ had been ‘discovered’ by Danish researchers. The principal
investigator was quoted on the promise of ‘a real possibility for prevention’ with ‘a simple test which now takes only one day’ (Nielsen, 2006).
1

1369-8486/$ - see front matter Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2008.09.008

416

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

respect to food safety and regulation of pesticides (Bech-Danielsen, 1998).
A closer look into the original scientiﬁc papers reveals a complex architecture3 behind seemingly straightforward statements
on breast cancer: the data networks of Danish population registries,
a long-term follow-up study on cardiovascular risk factors and, as
part of the latter, a local biobank. In tracing the ‘assemblages’4 of epidemiological data and samples, this article explores how data work
is instrumental in bringing molecular markers, originally products of
laboratory research, into clinical and public health relevance. Focusing on record linkage, this is an attempt to contextualise aetiologic
claims pertaining to molecular markers—such as CHEK2 or p53—
within the history of a population study. Put differently, this paper
traces back linkage procedures of two studies on breast cancer aetiology both based on the same local database and biobank to the context of data collection, that is the Copenhagen City Heart Study
(CCHS), a prospective epidemiological study initiated in 1975. Such
large-scale inventories of the general population to study cardiovascular disease were set up in Scandinavia during the 1960s and 1970s
and have been instrumental to the rise of preventive medicine. In
this context, the quantitative techniques of epidemiology have
developed into the basic science of public health. This paper asks
for the speciﬁc contribution of epidemiological techniques that use
inferential statistics5 and multivariate risk modelling; it tracks the
datawork of two aetiological studies of breast cancer that heavily
build on existing data and sample repositories.
‘Modern epidemiology’ has been described as ‘population
health aetiology’ (and even as ‘science of causation’) by Alfredo
Morabia (2005, p. 4). No longer focusing primarily on infectious
disease ‘epidemics’, but broadly reformulated as a set of methods
and designs for population studies, epidemiological techniques
were applied to cardiovascular disease and cancer in the twentieth
century.6 The universe of chance and probabilities of today’s numerical epistemologies in epidemiology and preventive medicine can be
traced back to demographic statistics (Porter, 1995) and, more generally, to the nineteenth century rise of ‘mechanical objectivity’
(Daston & Galison, 1992). In Ian Hacking’s terms, the quantitative
statistical inventory of society in the nineteenth century brought
about an ‘avalanche of numbers, the erosion of determinism and
the invention of normalism’ (Hacking, 1990, p. 5). A number of studies document how numerical methods and mathematical statistics
transformed medical research in the nineteenth and early-twentieth century (Matthews, 1995; Magnello, 2002; Magnello & Hardy,
2005).
Recently, historians have also begun to address the post World
War II history of epidemiology, that is the generation of evidence in
therapeutic research or the risk factor concept in preventive medicine (Marks, 1997; Aronowitz, 1998; Berridge, 2005; Weisz, 2005).
Luc Berlivet (1999, 2005a) has reviewed the understanding of

objectivity relative to health risks and the controversy on whether
epidemiological results could prove ‘causation’ or just ‘association’
in the context of smoking and lung cancer in the 1950s, a topic that
has also been covered by Mark Parascandola (2005), in particular in
relation to the research conducted at the National Cancer Institute
in the US.7 Addressing the issue of causality8, cancer epidemiologist
Paolo Vineis (1997) has compared the predominant ‘empiricist’ tradition of observational medicine to the ‘realist’ tradition for instance
in physics. He holds that epidemiology, as an ‘intermediate science’
should combine both approaches and attribute more value to mechanistic considerations instead of exclusively relying on formal statistical concepts of evidence. Olga Amsterdamska (2005) describes how
epidemiologists spelled out the scientiﬁcity of their non-laboratory
discipline against other biomedical sciences. Exploring epidemiology
in a broader cultural framework, James Trostle (2005) stresses the
aspect of social exchange in data collection and called for more collaboration between epidemiologists and medical anthropologists.
Focusing on the history of epidemiological methods, a recent anthology also presents aspects of research practice, such as the development of study designs (Morabia, 2005).
While many of the contributions to the most recent history of
the discipline were written by epidemiologists, few science studies
scholars have focused on epidemiological knowledge production of
population studies. This paper looks at the role of data collecting,
storing and record linkage in epidemiologic research. Case studies
from the Nordic countries are of particular interest here due to
their central population registries with the capacity to link individual records. As an information resource on a population level, these
nationwide registries have been instrumental to epidemiologic research in Denmark.
Since its start in 1976, the Copenhagen City Heart Study9—
locally referred to as the Østerbro study—has been used to address
a wide range of research questions from prevention, aetiology, treatment evaluation to health economy. Most of the studied topics were
related to cardiovascular disease, but research soon extended to
other outcomes. Among the diverse studies based on the Østerbro
dataset,10 this paper will focus in more detail on the re-use of these
data for two lines of investigation on breast cancer aetiology: the
ﬁrst example deals with a study on exposure to industrial chemicals
as an aetiological component for breast cancer (Høyer et al., 2002).11
The second example relates to the investigation of CHEK2 as a ‘candidate gene’ for breast cancer (Weischer et al., 2007). Whereas the
latter study is targeted at investigating a susceptibility gene, Høyer
et al. (2002) take on an environmental health framework and focus
on the inﬂuence of organochlorine exposure12 on breast cancer under consideration of the molecular marker p53. I will argue that,
based on the same data but each in a different research setup, these
studies have brought forward different articulations within the discursive space of genomic epidemiology.

3
With ‘architecture’ I take up an actor’s category, used to discuss the set up of epidemiological research. See for example Clinical epidemiology: The architecture of clinical
research (Feinstein, 1985).
4
The use of the term ‘assemblage’ is inspired by Rabinow (2003) and Deleuze and Guattari (1988). For the concept of ‘assemblage’ with respect to the study of biotechnology,
see Rabinow (2003, p. 56).
5
In using inferential statistics, epidemiology draws on the biometrics tradition: the techniques of contingency tables go back to Karl Pearson; the concept of randomisation was
introduced by Ronald A. Fisher in the 1920s (Fisher, 1925; Porter, 1995; Desrosières, 1998).
6
On the shift from the bacterial agent of infectious disease to more holistic concepts as to chronic disease and multifactorial causation, see Mendelsohn (1998).
7
Most of the research on recent epidemiology has concentrated on North America and the UK; see Berlivet (2005b) for the development of epidemiology in France in the
second half of the twentieth century.
8
It is beyond the scope of this paper to cover the concepts of causation; pragmatic criteria for causation have been formulated starting from Austin Bradford Hill (1937, 1965),
to Mervyn Susser (1991), Nathaniel Rothman and Sander Greenland (1998), Paolo Vineis (1997, 2005) and many others.
9
For reports on the Copenhagen City Heart Study’s examination series, see Appleyard (1989) and Schnohr et al. (2001).
10
The main areas of research conducted with these data that were originally compiled for the study of cardiovascular prevention include ageing, cancer, diabetes, epilepsy,
genetics, lifestyle, obesity, psychosocial factors, respiratory diseases, and stroke.
11
Høyer et al. published a series of articles investigating breast cancer and organochlorine exposures in biomedical journals between 1998 and 2002 (Høyer et al., 1998, 2000a,
2000b, 2000c, 2001, 2002).
12
The summary term ‘organochlorines’ refers to a large number of chloro-organic compounds, of which 15,000 were in wide use as pesticides and industrial chemicals
(including DDT, dieldrin, PCB).

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

Science studies scholars have described the pathways of molecules from the laboratory to the clinic (Chadarevian, 1998; Löwy,
1998) and mapped out ‘drug trajectories’ (Gaudillière, 2005) in biomedical research. Similar to the science studies approaches that
follow material objects and things through history (Heesen &
Spary, 2001; Daston, 2005), this paper follows ‘digital things’ (Pálsson, 2005) together with the material samples collected for epidemiology. It examines the data networks of epidemiological studies
as heterogeneous digital assemblages.13 To follow the different data
trajectories across context, I draw primarily on published documents—in this case rich resources in themselves, since they comprise
detailed descriptions of the study set up as well as full tabulation of
the data set; these were published by the Copenhagen City Heart
Study ofﬁce in 1989 to meet the needs of secondary data users.
These published sources have been complemented with archival
documents, media accounts as well as expert interviews.
The sections of this paper expose various practices with data:
the ﬁrst section introduces the contested ﬁeld of breast cancer aetiology as a background to the actual case study (2), followed by
more conceptual considerations on data assemblages in epidemiology (3). The second part zooms into the data collecting practices in
the Østerbro study (4) and into related data mining through central
registries (5). The third part (6) focuses on the recombination of
these data in genomic epidemiology, tracing how genes and environment as breast cancer determinants are renegotiated in molecular epidemiology. The concluding paragraph (7) revisits the
effects of these practices as to the conﬁguration of knowledge in
epidemiology; here, I will argue that following the pathways of
digital data over time and across context can shed light on the
ways epidemiological techniques co-shape biomedical knowledge.
2. Breast cancer epidemiology: sorting out genetic and
environmental determinants
The aetiology of breast cancer has been subject to sustained
controversy across many disciplines of the life sciences. In epidemiology, carcinogenesis is conceived as a multifactorial stochastic
process with a plethora of ‘probabilistic determinants’14 at different levels; the variables of aetiologic studies can range from genetic
and molecular to lifestyle, environmental and socio-economic factors.15 It was in particular the Framingham Heart Study16 that set
the stage for ‘risk factor epidemiology’, a framework which became
widely adopted in epidemiology as the ‘risk factor approach’ (Aronowitz, 1998). The concept of multiple causation17 was methodologically developed in multivariate statistical modelling and remained
largely unchallenged in most domains of epidemiology; the risk factor approach was perceived as a neutral framework for the study of
chronic diseases. While developed within a biomedical concept of
disease causation,18 its success can be attributed to its capacity to

417

provide a conceptual framework that also allowed inclusion of environmental and socio-economic variables as risk factors. As Robert
Aronowitz (ibid., p. 144) put it, it is the openness and a ‘purposeful
ambiguity’ in the risk factor concept that made it uniting and attractive to many disciplines and agendas, whilst representing precision,
speciﬁcity, quantiﬁcation, and individualism. In the 1990s, aetiological concepts themselves came under scrutiny, for example in explicit controversies over breast cancer; social epidemiologist Nancy
Krieger (1994) has spelled out biomedical and socio-political models
of causation as conﬂicting explanatory frameworks. More generally,
the question of whether epidemiologists should adhere to the social
sciences or to molecular biology has been subject to a vivid debate.19
These different conceptual traditions that played out in the epidemiological investigation of breast cancer in the later twentieth
century are also reﬂected in the studies conducted with the Østerbro data in Copenhagen. In what follows I brieﬂy explicate two
such research lines in the study of breast cancer, relevant for my
case study here: ﬁrst the research conducted in an environmental
health framework, with its focus on organochlorine exposure, is
introduced; this is followed by a description of the epidemiological
study of candidate genes for breast cancer (here a CHEK2 variant).
It has been pointed out that the few established risk factors account for only about half of breast cancer risk (Snedeker, 2001, p.
35); therefore epidemiologists have repeatedly called for more
studies on the role of modiﬁable environmental and social conditions in breast cancer aetiology. One major line of environmental
breast cancer research has focused on organochlorines, which are
understood as hormonally active when incorporated into the human body. The assessment of organochlorine exposures is considered a complex and difﬁcult task, given the many congeners of
organochlorines and metabolite compounds with different degrees
of toxicity. The difﬁculty is that often only summary indicators of
the overall exposures can be measured and therefore the interpretation of results is not straightforward, in particular when there are
no exposure histories but data on biomarkers only (Snedeker,
2001). Epidemiological studies on the health effects of organochlorines have been conducted for more than two decades with inconsistent results (Brody & Rudel, 2003).20 While it would be
worthwhile to examine each of these studies ‘in the making’ as well
as in their socio-cultural aspects, this paper focuses in particular on
how the architecture of long-term epidemiological studies is set up
through work with data, as exempliﬁed by the data linkage and
recombination for a speciﬁc case study.
Høyer et al. pursued an environmental health framework when
they made use of the dataset of the Østerbro study and stored serum samples: their studies report increases in breast cancer risk
with dieldrin exposures (but not DDT or DDE) and decreases in survival time of breast cancer patients (Høyer et al., 1998, 2000a). In
particular since the 1990s with the emerging sequencing technol-

13
Drawing on his studies on the Icelandic genome project, Gísli Pálsson describes ‘digital assemblies’, the byproducts of experimental biomedicine, as ‘machines’ to drill into the
past and to generate novel connections (Pálsson, 2005, p. 250).
14
The notion of ‘probabilistic determinants’ is often used alternatively to ‘risk factors’ in epidemiology; it relates to the framework of multiple causation and multivariate
statistics, in which potential determinants of disease are tested within a population dataset. The probabilistic understanding of the term ‘determinants’ is key to ‘modern
epidemiology’, deﬁned as the ‘study of the distributions and determinants [. . .] in populations’ (Last,1983, pp. 32–33).
15
For a summary overview on the ﬁeld of cancer epidemiology, see for example Henderson et al. (1996).
16
The Framingham Study is a large-scale epidemiological study begun in 1943; the study established what became known as cardiovascular risk factors (Kannel, 2000).
17
Conceptualised as ‘web of causation’ (McMahon et al., 1960, p. 18), the modelling process can integrate knowledge from multiple levels of investigations and disciplines, such
as molecular sciences, mechanistic models, environmental and socio-economic variables. Among other criteria, ‘biological plausibility’ makes up an important causality criterion
in the interpretation of associations detected by epidemiologic studies (Hill, 1965).
18
The biomedical proponents of the risk factor approach in the context of the Framingham Study used epidemiological methods to broaden pragmatically the traditional focus
on disease mechanisms; thus the risk factor approach served as an extension of the ‘ontological model of disease’ in medicine (Aronowitz, 1998, p. 125).
19
See for example Vineis (2005) and the debate on molecular and social epidemiology in 1999 in the International Journal of Epidemiology, 28(5), in particular: ‘Should the
epidemiologist be a social scientist or a molecular biologist?’ (Susser, 1999). Critical of ‘reductionist biomedical concepts’ and endorsing social epidemiology frameworks, Nancy
Krieger proposed an ‘ecosocial concept’ as a model that considers structural factors as determinants in processes of ‘embodiment’ in a ‘co-mingled social and biological world’.
(Krieger, 2001, p. 674).
20
Among the ﬁrst studies in this ﬁeld were the studies by Unger and Olsen (1980) and Unger et al. (1982, 1984), who conducted organochlorine measurements in tissue and
blood; results of subsequent epidemiological studies remained inconclusive.

418

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

ogies, research into gene–environment interaction and into genetic
polymorphisms as markers of susceptibility have gained prominence. The promise attributed to biomarker studies in this context
is to clarify inconsistent results; negative studies often state the
need to better account for individual susceptibility and underlying
biological mechanisms (Krieger et al., 1994). It is in this sense that,
again based on the CCHS dataset, the latest study by Høyer et al.
(2002) investigated the inﬂuence of p53 as a genomic marker for
the association between environmental exposure and breast cancer. Possible changes in epidemiological risk assessments due to
the inclusion of biomarkers can implicate revisions in toxicity classiﬁcation and, as a consequence, in the regulation of chemicals.
In the aftermath of the Human Genome Project, research into
genetic determinants of breast cancer has become a highly funded
domain. Clinical applications were envisioned and developed; in
Denmark, BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing entered clinical practice in
1997 and is offered to breast cancer patients and ovarian cancer
patients (Ejlertsen et al., 2007).21 However, testing for breast cancer
genes has remained controversial in view of limited predictive
capacities22 and related ethical considerations. Furthermore, only
25% of the familial aggregation has been found to be due to BRCA1
and BRCA2 (Antoniou & Easton, 2006), which drew the attention of
genetic epidemiologists to other candidate genes for breast cancer,
among them the CHEK2 polymorphism (Ahmed & Rahman, 2006;
Nevannlina & Bartek, 2006). As shown in molecular genetics studies
and described ﬁrst in Li Fraumeni patients (Bell et al., 1999), CHEK2,
encoding checkpoint kinase, is attributed an important role in DNA
damage repair, that is preventing cellular entry into mitosis
(CHEK2-Breast Cancer Consortium, 2002, p. 55). Due to its role in
DNA repair, this polymorphism was soon studied in relation to cancer; a large international consortium was initiated to study the association of a speciﬁc mutation (CHEK2*1100delC) with cancer risk in a
pooled study.23 Nevanlinna & Bartek (2006) refer to CHEK2 as a ‘candidate tumour suppressor’ gene that contributes both to sporadic
and hereditary breast cancer. Contrary to the stated ‘simplicity’ of
the genetic test itself, the interpretation of so-called ‘low penetrance’
alleles is difﬁcult; it may play some role in carcinogenesis but in
complex interaction with many other factors.
Given the conceptual stakes as to genes, environment and their
interactions, it is precisely epidemiology and biostatistical methods that are evoked to sort out multiple potential determinants
by drawing on the risk factor approach. Delineated as a formal
set of study designs and biostatistical methods, epidemiological
techniques have become the tools to evaluate hypotheses across
disciplines in the health sciences. Yet the speciﬁc setup and data

networking practices depend on many aspects, from data infrastructures, cultures of research and collaboration between disciplines to the broader societal conditions. While in the age of
genomics, breast cancer genetics, susceptibility and individual lifestyle research have become major research areas in contemporary
biomedicine, environmental health research has been considered a
rather marginalised topic.24 Brown et al. (2006) evoke a Kuhnian
model of paradigm shift in order to argue for environmental breast
cancer research as an innovative yet under-funded approach. Going
beyond a conceptual account of conﬂicting aetiologies and political
research agendas, my take on epidemiology here differs in that it
aims at exposing the role of data networks and research repositories.
Thus before tracing back the data assemblages of the two breast cancer studies by Høyer et al. (2002) and Weischer et al. (2007) to the
Østerbro study, I develop a more conceptual approach to databases
and biobanks. In doing so, I draw inspiration from studies of material
practices,25 yet here these approaches are extended to following
‘data trajectories’ in order to explore the epistemology of record linkage in population studies.
3. On databases and biobanks: research collections as resources
for knowledge production
Databases and biobanks are the research collections of much of
the contemporary biomedical sciences, including epidemiology.
Epidemiology is about collecting and storing information—notably,
the discipline is commonly deﬁned in terms of statistical ‘distributions and determinants’.26 Data collection can entail gathering new
information through speciﬁc questionnaires and targeted screenings
or making use of already existing data, for example from population
registries. Through data linkage between different levels of investigation—from molecular to economic—epidemiological studies perform statistical investigations at a population level. In this sense, I
examine epidemiological studies as complex biopolitical assemblages, where samples, data and techniques from different contexts
are temporarily brought together in particular conﬁgurations. I use
the term ‘assemblage’ to point out the heterogeneous, temporal
and at times arbitrary character of these conﬁgurations that may
change with novel measurement techniques, the constellations of
access to data and samples, and funding opportunities. From such
assemblages, the speciﬁc problematisations, experimental systems27
and regulated research platforms28 of epidemiology emerge. The further development of such ‘quasi-experimental’29 research systems in
observational epidemiology can be followed, by tracing the different
procedures of record linkage.

21
It is beyond the scope of this paper to discuss the different regulatory regimes and practices of cancer susceptibility testing in clinical settings. For studies on the sociopolitical shaping of clinical practices of susceptibility testing in France and in the US and the UK, see Bourret (2005) and Parthasarathy (2005), respectively.
22
Among those tested positively for BRCA1 and BRCA2, 46% and 43% respectively developed breast cancer before the age of 70 in a large sample in the US (Chen et al., 2006;
Antoniou et al., 2006).
23
For case series (families, individuals and controls) from clinical genetics centres in the UK, the Netherlands, North America and Germany, this association was demonstrated
among non-carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations (The CHEK2-Breast Cancer Consortium, 2002); other studies supported the model of CHEK2 as a susceptibility gene for breast
cancer as well (Vahteristo et al., 2002). Subsequently Oldenburg et al. (2003) studied ‘multiple case early onset breast cancer families’ from the Netherlands in which these
mutations were excluded and found that carrier patients developed breast cancer earlier than noncarriers; they concluded that CHEK2 may interact with unknown other genes to
increase breast cancer risk. In a pooled analysis of ten case-control studies, the CHEK2-Breast Cancer Case-Control Consortium (2004) reported an increased risk of breast cancer
in women unselected for family history. The Danish study (Weischer et al., 2007) added knowledge at the level of a general population.
24
It has also been argued that this is due to the fact that ubiquitous chemicals are most difﬁcult to study in epidemiology due to the lack of unexposed comparison groups
(Brown et al., 2005, p. 515). See Snedeker (2001) for a review of epidemiological research on pesticides and breast cancer. A PubMed search (9 November 2007) showed 24,276
hits for ‘gene & cancer & breast’, while ‘environment* & cancer & breast’ retrieved 3,593 hits.
25
Here, I refer to the concept of ‘following the thing in itself’ (Appadurai, 1988) and the notion of ‘material agency’ and ‘performativity’, as described by Andrew Pickering (1995)
in The mangle of practice. See Latour (1988, 1993) and Rheinberger (1997) for research into the material practices in the life sciences and epistemic things, and Daston (2005) for
‘thing studies’ within history of science and history of art.
26
‘Modern epidemiology’ has been deﬁned in statistical terms, i.e. as the ‘study of the distributions and determinants of health-related states and events in populations, and the
application of this study to control of health problems’ (Last, 1983, pp. 32–33).
27
See Rheinberger (1997) for the notion of ‘experimental systems’.
28
For the notion of ‘biomedical platforms’, see Keating and Cambrosio (2000, 2003).
29
Referring to study designs that guide data collection and analysis, epidemiologists distinguish between ‘experimental’ studies (clinical trials) and, ‘quasi-experimental’ or
‘semi-experimental’ studies (observational studies) (Hill, 1971, p. 320). For an analysis of clinical trials and clinical experimentation in medical research, in particular clinical
epidemiology, see also The progress of experiment (Marks, 1997).

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

When discussing the epistemological status of data and sample
repositories in epidemiology, it is helpful to frame these practices
within a more general history of collecting in the life sciences.
While many historiographies of the life sciences view natural
history collecting as an early feature that became subsequently
replaced by experimental approaches, Bruno Strasser (2006)
reminds us that natural history modes of collecting as a bioscientiﬁc practice go together with the rise of experimentalism, rather
than being disrupted by the latter. John Pickstone (2007, p. 513)
emphasises the signiﬁcance of these ‘other working knowledges
[. . .] before and besides [synthetic experiments]’,30 such as information banks, mathematical models, interactive simulations, or
electronic catalogues of molecular biology. While in its classic natural history tradition, collecting involves taking things away from
their original context and moving them to a central location or to another context which enhances their value (Peirce, 1995), collecting
can also imply the production of representations and the generation
of data by taking measurements or by describing observations (Parry, 2004). The very practices with scientiﬁc collections constitute
speciﬁc ways of ordering and knowing the world (Heesen & Spary,
2001). In material archives organised in a particular way, collections
convey knowledge through their arrangement and classiﬁcation.
Overviews achieved through displays of arranged collections are closely related to the emergence of statistical tabulation: storing specimens in a certain mode allows overviews at a glance while
performing classiﬁcation, a similar function can be attributed to statistical techniques of data categorisation and analyses.
In health statistics, collecting, measuring and correlating population data can be traced to the beginnings of mortality statistics
and classiﬁcations of causes of death,31 to censuses, insurance statistics and actuary risk calculation practices (Porter, 2000). Entrenched in governmental and administrative regimes, early vital
statistics data sets were part of state practices that co-determined
their collection, reporting and use. Their categories and routines of
classiﬁcation brought about certain modes of knowing which continue to be at work in recent biomedicine. Similar to the management of material samples in a biobank32, data are arranged in the
database in a speciﬁc format with particular variable descriptions
and deﬁnitions.
For the case of a genomics tool, Christine Hine describes databases as ‘emergent structures’ (Hine, 2006, p. 269)33 within a set
of work practices—as both embodying and being embedded in orders
of knowledge. With respect to collecting and databasing in epidemiological research, I am interested in how such emergent structures
are brought forward by data and sample arrangement, by linkage
opportunities and data processing practices. Yet, different from

419

Hine’s study on the development of a more ‘instrumental’ database
tool over its lifespan, this paper deals with epidemiological data
repositories and their temporal re-assemblages of data from different domains. Whereas databases store recorded ‘inscriptions’34 as
digital data, biobanks contain the ‘raw’ material (from which more
and novel inscriptions can be gained in the future) in a yet unknown
potentiality. In particular since the 1990s, many epidemiological
studies in Denmark have retained blood samples in biobanks; so
did the Østerbro study. In 2006, the CCHS biobank was praised as
a ‘once again invaluable’ resource, unforeseeably forming ‘the basis
for a new Danish research result, which ﬁrst in the world can tell
us something about the signiﬁcance of the third known breast cancer
gene, the CHEK2 gene, for the general population’ (Kamph, 2006).
What renders the biobanks of epidemiological studies into invaluable resources is that they are embedded in a deﬁned sample with
a detailed information infrastructure and high linkage capacity.
In aetiological epidemiology data and sample repositories are
used to investigate connections between exposure and outcome.
Outcome research, risk estimation and statistical hypothesis testing are enabled through analytical designs in which empirical data
are brought together, for example in ‘cohort studies’35 or ‘case-control studies’36. While registry-based cohort studies were the most
frequently used study design in the Scandinavian context, the
case-control design has increasingly been used since the 1960s: different from ‘following entire cohorts’, this type of study compares
disease cases to a set of controls. Viewed as a means to optimise
costs in expensive cohort studies, the case-control study became
the most common design in late-twentieth century risk factor epidemiology (Paneth et al., 2005). Subsequently, the case-control technique has been applied to many cohort datasets—often using socalled ‘nested’ or ‘embedded’ designs within an existing study—this
technique retrospectively enrols additional data, for example biomarkers for a subset of cases and controls in a ‘cohort-nested casecontrol study’ (Høyer et al., 2002).
In order to further explore how population databasing and biobanking functions epistemologically for this case study, the next
section turns to the set up of the epidemiological database that
underlies the two aetiological studies on breast cancer. As is common to the studies of material practices, I follow the digital data as
inscriptions from a questionnaire or a biobank—starting from the
very data recording. The Østerbro study is examined as a project
of collecting that generates an inventory of life habits of a general
population and, as the following sections will show, subsequently
makes use of the Danish population registries’ system as an infrastructure for data mining. Thus, after going back to the examination series of the Østerbro study, I will follow the data

30
Pickstone distinguishes between four ways of working and knowing: reading and rhetorics, natural history and craft, analysis and rationalisation, and synthetic
experimentation and systematic intervention, which he sees at work in different historical periods, albeit often simultaneously present in changing constellations and varying
signiﬁcance. Pickstone suggests these ways of working and knowing as analytical categories in the history of STM (Pickstone, 2000, 2007).
31
Similar to several other European countries, ‘vital statistics’ in Denmark can be traced back to seventeenth century parish registries. Until present these data are used in
historical demography (for Denmark, see e.g. Johansen, 2003) as well as in population genetics.
32
I use the term ‘biobank’ in the sense of storage of any biological material with linkage to individual data. This corresponds to the deﬁnition used in the legislation of many
countries, including the Danish regulations on biobanks (Loiborg et al., 2002).
33
In her study of a database tool for mouse genomics, Hine follows the database from development through to its fading into irrelevance (Hine, 2006).
34
With the notion of ‘inscriptions’ for the signals produced in the laboratory by ‘inscription devices’, I refer to Latour and Woolgar (1979) and Latour (1987). For contemporary
epidemiology, the term ‘inscriptions’ can be extended beyond the laboratory to the digital sphere; ‘inscription devices’ then include questionnaires and registration routines of the
health care system and of governments.
35
In demography, the term ‘cohort’ denotes a group of persons with a common statistical characteristic. In epidemiological ‘cohort studies’, different exposure groups of
otherwise ‘homogeneous populations’ are compared. Last (1983), p. 20, gave a broad deﬁnition of the term ‘cohort study’ (also known as concurrent, follow-up, longitudinal or
prospective study): ‘The method of epidemiologic study in which subsets of a deﬁned population can be identiﬁed who are, have been or in the future may be exposed or not
exposed, or exposed in different degrees, to a factor or factors hypothesized to inﬂuence the probability of occurrence of a given disease or other outcome’.
36
In the ‘case-control’ design the study ‘starts with the identiﬁcation of persons with the disease (or other outcome variable) of interest, and a suitable control (comparison,
reference) group of persons without the disease’ (Last, 1983, p. 15), in order to compile odds ratios as measures of association, which for large numbers correspond to the relative
risk in cohort studies. Janet Lane-Claypon’s 1926 examination of breast cancer is generally referred to as the ﬁrst modern case-control study. This design was used in particular in
the 1950s in studies on smoking and lung cancer in the US and Britain (Paneth et al., 2005). These broadly applicable research designs in turn stimulated the development of
multivariate techniques and statistical software convenient to epidemiologists. A set of mathematical modelling techniques were established and promoted in textbooks, for
instance the logistic function to calculate the ‘odds ratios’ as risk estimates from case-control studies. See Breslow and Day (1980, 1987).

420

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

trajectories over time, until they contribute to epidemiologic statements on the role of environment and genes in breast cancer
aetiology.
4. Epidemiology as a practice of collecting: the Copenhagen City
Heart Study
In the second half of the twentieth century, large prospective
cohort studies on cardiovascular disease were established in many
European countries.37 It was in the context of an emerging epidemiology of chronic disease that local studies of a new type—‘follow-up
studies’ or ‘cohort studies’—were initiated in Denmark. Large cohort
studies on cardiovascular diseases and ‘lifestyle risk’ were started in
several regions of Scandinavia in the 1960s and 1970s. These were
inspired by the Framingham Study, set up in 1948 in the city of Framingham, Massachusetts, which had coined the term ‘risk factor’
(Kannel, 2000) and became a prototype for cardiovascular
epidemiology.38
In comparative surveys—begun in 1956 as part of the Seven
Countries Study—‘lifestyle’ (understood as smoking, physical
activity and dietary habits) had been established as a risk factor
for cardiovascular disease, yet the international comparison suggested considerable regional variation in cardiovascular risk (Mariotti et al., 1982; Keys et al., 1984; Tunstall-Pedoe, 2003). This
prompted epidemiologists to initiate more comprehensive local
studies to investigate these regional differences. As for the Nordic
countries, a cardiovascular risk survey had been carried out in
North Karelia (Finland) in the 1950s as part of the Seven Countries
Study; early observational studies in Gothenburg (Sweden) and
Rejkjavik (Iceland) were established in 1963 and 1967 respectively
(Tunstall-Pedoe, 2003).
As a ﬁrst large scale prospective cohort study in Denmark, a
small group of clinicians initiated the Glostrup Population Studies
in 1964 and began collecting data for a 50 years age group, successively including more ‘birth cohorts’ (Hagerup et al., 1981; Jørgensen, 2004). A decade later, in 1975, clinicians, mostly cardiologists,
at the National University Hospital (Rigshospitalet) in Copenhagen
initiated the Østerbro study, comprising a ‘general adult population’ of all ages.39 Similar to Framingham, the study in Copenhagen
was set up as a long-term observational study in a sample of the
healthy population.
The loose network of clinicians involved in the early phase of
the Østerbro study perceived themselves as pioneers, believing in
prevention as an important contribution to medicine, beyond diagnostics and therapy.40 Marginalised at the time, the population
studies were carried out under tight funding conditions throughout
the 1970s and 1980s. In order to conduct quantitative comparisons,
standardised data for the general population to be observed prospectively were needed. Aiming at ‘reference values for an unselected
population’ (Appleyard, 1989, p.7), researchers drew a random sample of 20,000 people aged >20 years among the 90,000 inhabitants
registered in ten electoral districts in the vicinity of Rigshospitalet

(in Østerbro and Nørrebro). Letters of invitation to the examination
were mailed out with a system of reminders in order to maximise
response; the resulting participation rate of 74% in the ﬁrst examination was high in international comparison.
Reducing costs through effective logistics has been an important issue throughout the study. While the variables collected varied between examinations, the basic setup of the ﬁrst examination
has been kept.
At the ﬁrst station, a blood sample for examination of lipid- and
glucose level was drawn, presence of xantelasmata and earlobe-crease was noted, and a lung function test performed. At
the second station, height and weight were measured, a 12 lead
resting ECG recorded, and presence of arcus senilis and evaluation of signs of aging (i.e. grey hair, baldness and wrinkles), was
noted according to a code [. . .]. At the third and last station, the
questionnaire was checked and the blood pressure was measured. The results of the examination were explained to the participant, and were later mailed to the general practitioner.
(Appleyard, 1989, p. 9)
The nurses who were in charge of examining participants changed
between the different stations every two hours. The screenings
themselves were set up as a ‘conveyor belt’ to allow the throughput
of as many participants as possible.41
While participants waited for the examinations, they completed
a questionnaire, which contained items on symptoms and diseases,
on family history and, for women, on birth control and hormone
treatment, as well as detailed questions on the new ‘lifestyle risk
factors’. These were items on ‘smoking and drinking habits’
(amount and frequencies of alcohol and tobacco consumption) as
well as items on ‘physical activity at work and during leisure
time’42 (Fig. 1). The data in the forms were checked for completeness
by the nurses at the third station, while they explained the test results to participants.43
At the end of each day, blood samples were sent to the lab for
analyses of total and HDL-cholesterol, triglycerides and glucose.
All samples from the ﬁrst investigations were retained in a freezer
(Fig. 2). Storing samples in freezers for future use, later referred to
as biobanking, was practiced in the Østerbro study from early on.
In relation to the ﬁrst examinations in 1976–1978, this was rather
a backup routine, whereas from the third round of examinations in
1991–1994, researchers have been fully aware of the future importance of these resources for genetic epidemiology44 and serum,
plasma, full blood and DNA have been stored.
Collected data were documented in standardised sheets; questionnaires, lab results and electrocardiograms—literally ‘inscriptions’ of a signal on a piece of paper recorded by an inscription
device—were archived and coded. For the ﬁrst examinations, a
commercial bureau veriﬁed the ﬁnal datasheets and punched the
information in punch cards. These were read into a computer, data
were tabulated and checked for implausible values; these descriptive analyses were done at the central computer of Rigshospitalet.

37
For an example of large-scale international networks of local studies, see the WHO coordinated study ‘Monitoring trends in cardiovascular disease’ (‘MONICA’) (TunstallPedoe, 2003).
38
For an early report on the set-up of the Framingham Study, see Dawber et al. (1951). See Oppenheimer (2005) for a recent account of this inﬂuential study, termed ‘the
epitome of successful epidemiological research’ and ‘prototype and model of the cohort study’ by epidemiologist Mervyn Susser (Oppenheimer, 2005, p. 602). See Aronowitz
(1998) for a historical and sociological study of the shift from angina pectoris to cardiovascular disease with the Framingham study.
39
While the Glostrup population studies joined the international MONICA project of cardiovascular studies coordinated by the WHO, the CCHS remained a local study,
administrated by a local executive scientiﬁc committee. International coordination and standardisation of epidemiological studies became a major goal of the WHO: the WHO
ERICA studies initiated in 1964 comprised data from thirty-seven countries (ERICA Research Group, 1988; Lamm et al., 1989).
40
Peter Schnohr, personal communication, 30 March 2006.
41
Merete Appleyard, personal communication, 3 May 2006.
42
The range of data collected was wider in the third examination and included additional items, for example on lifestyle and stress (1991–1994).
43
Whereas the laboratory results were sent to participants’ general practitioners in the 1970s, the results were later sent directly to the participants; this reﬂects changes in
doctor–patient relationships towards patient autonomy and individualised responsibility.
44
Gorm Jensen, Presentation at BioLogue symposium, University of Copenhagen, 27 November 2006.

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

421

Fig. 2. Frozen samples of the Copenhagen City Heart Study (photograph by the
author). Medical Museion registration no. MM 93:2008 B g.

Fig. 1. Questionnaire used in the ﬁrst examination (1976–1978) of the Copenhagen
City Heart Study. Medical Museion registration no. MM 58:2008 G a, detail, p. 3.

In the 1970s, the tabulation of variables for a large study like the
Østerbro study was only possible at few central computers; in
Copenhagen these were central computers at Denmark’s Technical
University and at Rigshospitalet, where time slots needed to be
booked in advance.45 Rapid advances in information processing
led to a gradual decentralisation of computer capacity and the same
computations could be performed on a standard PC two decades
later.
In order to generate a database of reference values for the general population, a set of objectiﬁcation strategies had to be brought
to work: nurses had been trained according to the WHO manual for
cardiovascular epidemiological studies. In the evaluation of electrocardiograms, indices were manually measured from the curves
of the electrocardiograms (ECGs), following the ‘Minnesota code’,
a pragmatic standard to read indices from the paper curves.
Although ‘often arbitrary and arrived at by compromises [. . .]
[the Minnesota classiﬁcation] provides a framework for reporting
ECG items in uniform and clearly deﬁned terms’ (Appleyard,
1989, p. 155). Standardised sampling and coding secured that the
results qualiﬁed as reference data for comparison purposes. The
data that resulted from these large-scale examinations of a healthy
population were frequently drawn upon by other researchers; due
to the numerous requests, the investigators of the Østerbro study
published their data in full length as reference values for an ‘unselected population in Denmark’ (ibid., p. 7).

45

To follow up participants over time, examinations were repeated at 5–10 year intervals (1981–1983, 1991–1994 and 2001–
2003) to secure prospective data. Although participation rates declined over time—from 74% in the ﬁrst examination (1976–1978),
to 61% and 58% in the 1991–1994 and 2001–2003 examination,
respectively—the follow-up through population registries was
complete for study participants. Over the decades, data preservation became a critical issue with changing hardware and software
systems; in addition to electronic storage, questionnaires, original
schemes, and electrocardiograms were preserved and kept for
reference.
The report on the ﬁrst and second examination series of the
Østerbro study introduced the epidemiological framework as ‘the
study of occurrence of disease in populations and of factors inﬂuencing the disease distribution within the population’ and as
‘essential in prevention and in health care’ (ibid.). Laying out a
whole agenda of chronic disease epidemiology, the authors of the
1989 report problematised in particular the previous lack of reference values for diagnostic variables and lifestyle risk factors for a
general population.
Data inventories of cardiovascular reference values and lifestyle
variables were established through a research system that applied
diagnostics techniques to the general population, subjecting
healthy citizens to an extended clinical gaze.46 Studies such as
the Østerbro study were envisioned to record and statistically relate
detailed data on lifestyle habits to disease events later in life in order
to calculate risk estimates that would inform prevention at a population level, and guide health policy in prioritizing and targeting future interventions. With respect to the range of potential
determinants of disease, data collecting and analysis focused mainly
on ‘lifestyle’ variables that were perceived as modiﬁable and as

Merete Appleyard, personal communication, 7 June 2007.
With epidemiological studies, the clinical gaze (Foucault, 1973) is extended to the general population to an unprecedented degree, enrolling data of whole populations
statistically in the generation of biomedical knowledge.
46

422

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

under the control of the individual. In line with other studies, notably the Framingham Study, it was the individual level variables that
gained priority over social indicators or occupational factors in what
became understood as ‘risk factor epidemiology’. Albeit frequently
challenged in particular by social epidemiologists,47 the conceptualisation of individual lifestyle risk continues to be inﬂuential in shaping health research and policies at the present.48
During the decades following the ﬁrst examinations, the scope
of data use was extended far beyond lifestyle risk and cardiovascular disease. The next section will discuss how these observational
data gathered in the Østerbro study were connected to other research questions beyond the immediate context of the data
collection.

5. Data mining: ‘when an entire country is a cohort’49
From the early 1980s onwards, the data from the Østerbro study
were linked to the Danish registry system, for example to the
Causes of Death Registry50 for mortality data. Epidemiologists working with data from the Østerbro study have made use of the system
of central registries and connected the data to a wide range of further outcomes. Research ranged from the quantitative descriptions
of disease incidence in relation to physical activity, nutrition, hypertension, and ‘signs of aging’ in the early years, to the more recent
study of molecular markers. The linkage capacity of the dataset
and application of methods to generate risk estimates for exposure
variables in relation to outcomes provided a host of research opportunities and resulted in a considerable publications record.51
The system of population registries, which are speciﬁc to the
Nordic countries, provided linkage opportunities to, at the time,
more than sixty health registries and ﬁfteen administrative registries, which were explicitly promoted for use in health research
in Denmark (Meulengracht & Madsen, 1982). For instance, the National Danish Hospital Registry has stored data on hospital admissions from 1977 onwards and outpatient and emergency data have
been included since 1995 (Andersen et al., 1999). A system of individual identiﬁcation numbers (CPR-no.) introduced by the Central
Population Registry on April 1, 1968 makes it possible to connect
data within different registries. Although not primarily intended
for research but for administration purposes, the CPR-no. became
routinely used in epidemiology, both in local studies and for
nationwide investigations. Computerised in the 1970s, population
registries are seen as instrumental in generating internationally
relevant research output (Mortensen, 2004, p. 122). The following
paragraphs exemplify the use of these linkage opportunities for the
two breast cancer studies that were conducted based on the data
and biobanks of the Østerbro study.
When investigating the aetiology of breast cancer with data
from a cardiovascular study, data on breast cancer needed to be
retrieved from the registries. In both studies (Høyer et al., 2002;
Weischer et al., 2007) the records of the Østerbro study were connected to the Danish Cancer Registry52 and the breast cancer treatment registry (operated by the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative
Group (DBCG))—the two main sources for breast cancer incidence
data.53 The DBCG registry had been established for the nationwide

clinical breast cancer trial that started in 1977 and stores treatment
data, including data on histology and tumour stage (Fisherman et al.,
1977, 1988).
Data mining was based on record linkage through CPR-nos.; for
the study by Høyer et al. (2000a, 2000b, 2000c, 2001, 2002) the
embedded ‘nested case-control study’ was described as follows:
The aim of this cohort nested case-control study is to evaluate if
mutations in p53 interact with organochlorines possible endocrine disrupting effect on breast cancer risk and survival [. . .]

The cohort was followed with regard to development of invasive breast cancer to the end of 1992 by linkage to the Danish
Cancer Registry, which is regarded virtually complete. [. . .]
From the remainder of the CCHS cohort, two women were
selected randomly to act as controls after matching for age
and vital status at the time of diagnosis of the corresponding
case. Information on vital status, cause, and date of death until
July 31, 1997 was obtained by linkage to the Civil Registration
System and the Causes of Death Registry, Danish National Board
of Health. (Høyer et al., 2002, p. 60)
For studies conducted on the top of existing cohort studies yet under inclusion of new variables, the technique of ‘nesting’ plays a
fundamental role in the mining and re-use of data from cohort studies and in the re-assemblages with new data. In ‘nested designs’
additional variables are included for a subset of cases and controls
selected from the cohort for a speciﬁc study that is superimposed
on the existing dataset. This bears the advantage of still beneﬁting
from the infrastructure of the larger study, which makes sample
and data access easier.
In order to investigate the inﬂuence of organochlorine exposure
on cancer incidence based on the study’s dataset, Høyer et al.
brought together data from the Østerbro study with records of
the central registries; as the authors afﬁrm: ‘The considerabl[e]
amount of information obtained in the CCHS together with the
Danish tradition of systematically registering cancer cases, and
the unique ID number assures complete follow-up’ (ibid., p. 63).
In their new context, the data from the original questionnaire of
the Østerbro study were mined for ‘known and suspected risk factors for breast cancer’ (ibid., p. 60).
Høyer et al. (2000b, 2002) re-circulated data and biological
samples with a ‘nested case-control design’. They matched two
‘controls’ to each breast cancer ‘case’ of the Østerbro data in order
to compute odds ratios as estimates of breast cancer risk in dependence of the exposure.
To assess the inﬂuence of other factors, the variables—as available from the Østerbro study—were used for risk computation
(Fig. 3). The regression model to calculate age-adjusted odds ratios
can be performed for all other variables that are available. Depending on whether they were found statistically signiﬁcant or not, they
were included or excluded in the ﬁnal statistical models (Høyer
et al., 2000b, p. 180; 2002, p. 61).
Thus, a set of variables collected for the context of cardiovascular disease is rendered into an aetiological matrix for breast cancer;
data availability and possibilities to retrieve them are key to the

47
There has been criticism of the focus on lifestyle, in particular from social epidemiologists, who emphasise the social and structural determinants of health, see for example
Berkman & Kawachi (2000) and Krieger (2001); see also Section 2 of this paper on challenges to the biomedical model by social epidemiologists.
48
If compared to other Scandinavian countries, the lifestyle focus has been particularly prominent in Denmark (Vallgårda, 2006).
49
See Frank (2000).
50
For a description of the Danish Causes of Death Registry, see Juel and Helweg-Larsen (1999).
51
For a publication list of the Copenhagen City Heart Study from 1977 to the present, see Copenhagen City Heart Study (n.d.) The publication record reached >500 papers by
2008.
52
The Danish Cancer Registry is the ﬁrst nationwide registry of that kind and has been operating since 1 January 1943. It was managed by the Danish Cancer Society, before it
became part of the Danish National Board of Health in 1997.
53
See Storm (1991) for an account of the differences (and the implications for epidemiology) between the data of the Danish Cancer Registry and of the DBCG.

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

423

choice of modelling parameters. As additional risk factors, these
variables were examined for modifying effects via statistical modelling and the parameters found signiﬁcant in the analysis (parity,
body weight and hormone replacement therapy) were kept in the
ﬁnal model. Moving across context, the data initially recorded as
cardiovascular risk factors in the Østerbro study have become potential modiﬁers of breast cancer risk.
In a similar way, in their study on the CHEK2 gene, Weischer
et al. (2007) performed data mining from multiple sources, yet in
a differing conﬁguration. To identify breast cancer cases (and other
cancers) in the CCHS for the period between 1947 through 2002:
Diagnoses of invasive cancer [. . .] were obtained from the Danish Cancer Registry, which identiﬁes 98% of all cancers in Denmark. [. . .] Follow-up time for each participant began at the
establishment of the Danish Civil Register System April 1,
1968, or the participant’s 20th birthday, whichever came later,
and ended at death, event, emigration, or on December 31st,
2002, whichever came earlier. [. . .] Follow-up was 100% complete. (Weischer et al., 2007, p. 58)
Thus, the ﬁrst study reported was an analysis of incidence data for,
among other cancer sites, breast cancer and the CHEK2*1100delC
mutation status within the complete prospective cohort study. Data
on cancer incidence were mined for the entire cohort from the cancer registry and full genotyping of blood samples from participants
had been conducted for this part of the study. In addition to this cohort analysis, a case-control study was designed, recruiting the
breast cancer cases treated at the hospital, while using the Østerbro
data as a source for selecting ‘population controls’ from a database
considered representative of the general population. The ‘hospital
cases’ were interviewed, while for the ‘controls’ from the Østerbro
study the questionnaire data on lifestyle and the results from the
physical examinations in 1976–1978 and 1981–1983 were made
available to the new study. In the 1990s, the epidemiologists used
information on smoking habits, alcohol consumption, body mass index, parity, use of oral contraceptive, menopausal status and hormonal replacement therapy (ibid., pp. 58–59) from the data that
were collected (via questionnaires) in the context of the investigation of cardiovascular disease. Again, in the new context, the variables of the Copenhagen City Heart Study acquire the status of
potential risk factors for breast cancer—factors that interact with
genetic predispositions and other factors in carcinogenesis.
The system of central population registries co-shaped the ways
epidemiological research has been set up. For instance, this system
also determined the beginning of the follow-up in the breast cancer studies analysed here. As Mortensen (2004, p. 121) has put it,
1968 is the ‘year zero in Denmark’ for most current registry research. It was the record linkage opportunities that made it possible that the data from the study of cardiovascular prevention could
help investigate breast cancer. In this way, the Østerbro data serve
post hoc as an empirical resource to study other outcome variables,
made possible through data mining.
Whereas epidemiological studies elsewhere have to collect
most variables using questionnaires, the regulations in the Nordic
countries allow epidemiologists to directly access certain individual data from central registries:
Denmark has a well-operating system of unique person-numbers, which has great practical signiﬁcance in everyday life,
and which makes it possible to follow the Dane ‘from the cradle
to the grave’. The basic data of the CPR can be linked to individual information about for example health, disease and occupational status. (Olsen et al., 2004, p. 1459)54

54

Fig. 3. Re-evaluation of data from the Copenhagen City Heart Study for breast
cancer risk. Table originally published by Høyer et al., 2000b, Table 2, p. 180;
reprinted with the kind permission of Springer Science and Business Media.

With epidemiological and biostatistical tools, the relationship
between ‘health outcomes’ as held in these registries and a large
array of potential determinants—as potential risk factors, indicators or surrogate variables—can be connected, tested for associations and the latter expressed as probabilistic risk estimates. In
particular through the regulation of data access favourable to the
needs of epidemiologists, registry research has become an academic subdiscipline in the health sciences (Mortensen, 2004).
The speciﬁc conditions for record linkage in Denmark were
launched as a competitive resource, when it comes to epidemiological research in the age of genomics (Melbye, 2001; Frank, 2003;
Mortensen, 2004).
Moreover, in Denmark in the last 30 years a number of biological banks storing blood samples, urine samples, biopsies (biobanks) have been established. Such biobanks are of
extraordinary value in epidemiological research. To this picture
of excellent research conditions belongs that the Danish population is to a great extent willing to contribute information to
research, for example in the form of the donation of a blood
sample and answering a questionnaire. (Olsen et al., 2004, p.
1459)
Combining data from different sources in new ways is particularly important in molecular and genetic epidemiology. The subdiscipline of genetic epidemiology has changed the mode in
which research on cardiovascular disease and cancer was con-

The translations from the review article ‘From counting cancers to the cancer registry’ in the Ugeskrift for Lger (Danish Medical Weekly) are my own.

424

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

ducted by the mid 1990s. The option to recombine existing datasets with new molecular variables renders epidemiologic databases into productive resources for novel hypothesis testing.
6. Recombining information in genomic epidemiology
Existing biobanks and data resources have increasingly been
used to study the signiﬁcance of genetic variability in ‘complex diseases’ with multifactorial aetiologies and population studies in this
ﬁeld are often referred to as ‘public health genomics’.55 To shed
light on the speciﬁc productivity of epidemiological techniques in
making sense of sequence information and molecular markers at a
population level, this section continues to follow the data from the
Østerbro study. The focus now moves from data mining to the reuse of both data and samples in the two breast cancer studies. In
what ways were the data from the CCHS and population registries
recombined with new measurements? What kinds of data rearrangements were made in the study designs to include molecular
determinants?
6.1. Organochlorine exposures and breast cancer: testing new markers
on already existing samples
To assess exposure to organochlorines as of several decades ago,
Høyer et al. negotiated access to the samples that had been
retained. Thus, the frozen serum samples were now, twenty years
later, used and reanalysed to assess the exposure. The researchers
secured detailed exposure reconstruction by collaboration with a
specialised laboratory.56 As the published paper reports, 0.5 ml from
the original serum samples were retrieved and sent to the US Center
for Disease Control (CDC) for comprehensive analyses. In this way,
new exposure data were gained from the original samples; still they
remain bound to the conﬁguration of the original study. Like in data
mining, the ‘nested’ design was the technique that made it possible
to include further ‘exposure’ variables as determinants; it reduced
the number of measurements and therefore costs, while keeping
the representivity of the cohort as methodological beneﬁt.
Høyer et al. (2002) not only re-used the retained serum samples
from the Østerbro study’s biobanks to measure exposure in detail,
but also reﬁned the classiﬁcation of the outcome—breast cancer—
with molecular techniques. They traced the original diagnostic
biopsies in order to measure immunohistochemical and genetic
biomarkers of the stored tumour tissue.
Further linkage to the nation-wide clinical trial of the Danish
Breast Cancer Cooperative Group provided information on
breast cancer tumor characteristics and the reviewing pathology facility, from which the parafﬁn embedded tumor tissue
specimen was obtained. Ten micrometer sections of the most
viable part of the parafﬁn specimen were prepared for the
detection of p53 mutations. (Ibid., p. 60)
As the authors further describe, DNA was extracted from the tissue sections and exons 4–11 were screened for the ‘tumour suppressor gene’ encoding the p53 protein. In this context, the p53
marker is understood as ‘a ﬁngerprint to implicate environmental
exposure’ (ibid.). Thus, the p53 mutation remains an ambiguous
intermediary, situated between an exposure effect and a tumour
characteristic, at the same time it becomes a potential ‘signature
of exposure’. By including this marker in the study, it is hoped that

55

inconclusive results can be clariﬁed and ‘the causal associations are
expected to emerge more clearly’ (ibid.) after accounting for p53.
In epidemiological terms, the interaction of the genetic polymorphism and organochlorine exposure as to cancer risk was to be
determined.
Brought together in a nested case-control study, molecular variables, registry data and lifestyle variables from the questionnaires
were enrolled into multivariate statistical modelling. Compared to
the earlier studies by the same authors, the innovation was that
the newly gained exposure variables from the samples stored in
the biobank as well as the p53 marker measured in tumour tissue
enter the risk calculation. The biostatistical analyses included comparisons in terms of risk differences and risk ratios between groups
deﬁned by organochlorine levels and ‘mutant p53’ or ‘wildtype
p53’ status (ibid.), with adjustment for a set of ‘potential confounders’ (ibid., p. 61). All potential determinants (including parity,
household income and education) are subsequently tested and
those found statistically signiﬁcant were kept in the ﬁnal logistic
regression model. Thus variables from different levels and contexts
were brought into one model equation and then statistically tested
for associations with breast cancer under multiple adjustments.
The hypothesis testing takes place as biostatistical modelling, a retrospective quasi-experiment in silico57 constructed post-hoc with
the data at hand, i.e. from the Østerbro study, the registries and
new variables gained from the stored tissue. When translated to
public health—for the case of organochlorines this is of concern with
respect to health risk assessment and regulation58—the resulting risk
ﬁgures carry on categories of data collecting and decisions made in
data modelling.
6.2. A candidate for epidemiology: the CHEK2 gene
Different from the ‘environmental’ study by Høyer et al., the
conﬁguration of variables in the ‘genetic’ study by Weischer et al.
is entirely targeted at the CHEK2 polymorphism: the investigators
set up the study to test the inﬂuence of the CHEK2*1100delC mutation. This genetic marker was investigated as a potential determinant, whilst adjusting for environmental and lifestyle variables. At
the University Hospital, the blood samples of the 1991–1994
examination of the Østerbro study were fully genotyped. In order
to investigate the inﬂuence of this candidate gene, the generated
sequence data were statistically modelled together with the variables from the Østerbro study. To interrogate the dataset for the
signiﬁcance of polymorphisms in the CHEK2 tumour suppressor
gene as to breast cancer risk, Weischer et al. (2007) used two study
designs in parallel.
In the ﬁrst analysis, the data from the examinations of the
Østerbro study were modelled following the cohort design; the
data were divided into different groups, according to the ‘CHEK2
status’ of participants. Connecting the individual data, recorded
over three decades, to the DNA sequence information, breast cancer risks were calculated in dependence of ‘CHEK2 status’. As reported in the paper, statistical adjustments for lifestyle risk
factors included:
age, body mass index (<25 v P = 25kg/m2), alcohol consumption (0g/wk v > 0 g/wk), nulliparity (yes v no), current use of
oral contraceptives (yes v no) menopausal status (pre- v postmenopausal), and current use of hormone replacement therapy
(yes v no). (Weischer et al., 2007, p. 58)

See for example the recent ‘public health genomics’ and ‘public health genetics’ initiatives in the health sciences—such as ‘Genpub’, University of Copenhagen (n.d.).
Organochlorine analyses were conducted at the US Center for Disease Control, Atlanta; the measurements included eighteen chlororganic pesticides, twenty-eight PCB
congeners and DDTs (Høyer et al., 2002, p. 60).
57
For the notion of ‘biology in silico’ and biology as an information science, see for example Lenoir (1999).
58
For the public debate on threshold values for pesticides in food which followed the 1998 publication of the study on organochlorines, see Dørge (1998).
56

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

Thus, most parameters, as available in the Østerbro study, were included to adjust for different lifestyle risks, while the aetiologic
hypothesis tested was the association with the CHEK2 polymorphism. With this ‘candidate gene’ approach that investigates speciﬁc genes in ‘association studies’ at a population level, the
breast cancer risk estimates were adjusted for differences in
‘lifestyle’.
As a second design reported in the same publication, Weischer
et al. used a case-control approach to compare breast cancer ‘cases’
diagnosed and treated at the University Hospital to ‘controls’ borrowed from the Østerbro study:
The case-control study included 1,101 women with invasive
breast cancer consecutively recruited at Herlev University Hospital between February 2001 and August 2004 [. . .] Controls
were 4,665 general population (The Copenhagen City Heart
Study) from the same age range as the patients and who had
no history of breast cancer before the end of 2002. (Ibid.)
In this data recombination, both for ‘cases’ and ‘controls’, detailed
lifestyle and exposure data were accessed, which allowed the computation of risk estimates (‘odds ratios’) for the different subgroups
deﬁned by CHEK2 status. Thus, in this mode of recombining data,
the Østerbro study is used as a pool of population-based ‘controls’,
in other words a reference population for comparison.
For candidate gene studies in cohorts with complete follow-up
for thirty years as in the Østerbro study, even the null results are
frequently cited, as they can serve to falsify hypotheses that were
suggested by smaller case-control studies.59 As its main and most
cited result, the CHEK2-study showed a threefold increase in breast
cancer risk and no increase in risk for other cancers with the inherited mutation in the CHEK2 gene. In this combined study, the dataset stabilised CHEK2 as a tumour suppressor gene and as a
signiﬁcant risk factor for breast cancer. The authors conclude that
‘women with CHEK2*1100delC may beneﬁt from breast cancer
screening, preferably excluding the use of ionizing radiation’ (ibid.,
p. 62). Further optimistic statements regarding clinical testing, given by the researchers to the media60 raised a controversy among
clinical practitioners on the relevance and ethics of testing for
low penetrance risk markers such as CHEK2 (Gerdes, 2006; Weischer et al., 2006).
6.3. Re-mobilizing data for molecular epidemiology
Genetic epidemiology has had an important place in the recent
research with the Østerbro study’s data since the 1990s (Nordestgaard et al., 1996). What made long-term cohort studies such as
this local database interesting to molecular epidemiologists in
the mid 1990s was the biological material collected and retained
combined with complete medical and lifestyle information at an
individual level. Building on the CCHS data, breast cancer is investigated using the molecular markers available from the tissue and
blood samples. With the broader availability of sequencing technologies, epidemiological studies have increasingly taken into account genetic variables. Epidemiological techniques have come to
work as tools to make sense of genomic data; conceptually epidemiologists continue to draw on the notion of multicausality—
the ‘web of causation’ (McMahon et al., 1960, p. 18)—to study multiple gene–environment interactions. As documented for the envi-

59

425

ronmental breast cancer studies (Høyer et al., 2002), the shift to
include molecular variables in epidemiology also holds for environmental health research. Whereas during the 1960s and 1970s,
the matrix of risk factors extended above all to new ‘lifestyle’ variables, the fabric of epidemiological knowledge have come to look
very different thirty years later, when risk factors include the
molecular level.61 The ways aetiological risk factors are addressed
in epidemiological research increasingly move to the molecular level
of biomarkers.
While the Copenhagen City Heart Study had initially been
aimed at investigating cardiovascular disease, its database came
to function as a productive empirical archive for the study of
new markers in the context of genomic epidemiology. Reassembled with molecular variables, such as the CHEK2 polymorphism
or p53, this database moved on to new research on molecular
aetiologies. As exempliﬁed for the Østerbro study’s database,
genomic epidemiology makes use of multiple levels, from micro
to macro; from DNA sequence to lifestyle and socioeconomic variables such as household income. This mode of genomic epidemiology has implications not only with respect to candidate genes or
molecular markers, but in a transformed matrix of disease determinants. Thus, with genomic epidemiology the ways social, lifestyle and environmental factors are addressed have changed to
the molecular level of biomarkers and transformed the epistemic
conﬁgurations of how aetiologies are and can be understood. Yet,
as the two breast cancer studies illustrate, there is a range of different positions and conceptual traditions—environmental health
versus
genetics—that
remain
present
within
genomic
epidemiology.
Establishing the databases, collecting and genotyping samples,
extracting and connecting the information is laborious and involves well designed collecting logistics and meticulous data
organisation as well as advanced methods in statistical modelling. In epidemiological practice, it may not always be feasible
to obtain the variables of interest, then surrogates and proxies
for instance for exposure history need to be developed and included in the model. Despite resistances encountered, the epidemiological techniques are highly ﬂexible in drawing together
data at multiple levels and from different contexts—registries,
hospitals, biomedical laboratories, biobanks etc. Epidemiology
follows pragmatic considerations of data access as much as conceptual frameworks, prior beliefs, methodological standards,
mechanistic understandings and ideas on aetiology. It is the possibility and performativity of record linkage that enrols population databases with retained blood and tissue samples into
‘biovalue’.62 However, the more variables are included, the larger
the datasets required to achieve sufﬁcient statistical power, a limitation often faced in studies on gene-environment interactions.
Therefore it is precisely the already existing large-scale studies
and registries that are invaluable for genomic epidemiology. Together, databases and biobanks become unique and sustained resources for research, which are drawn upon to develop and test
new aetiological hypotheses, made possible by data mining and
data recombination. At the same time, such aetiological studies
are contingent on their history of data collecting and biobanking,
as well as on the registry infrastructure and the socio-cultural factors that shaped their categorisations, which present important
epistemological implications.

Børge G. Nordestgaard, personal communication, 11 October 2006.
See Nielsen et al. (2006). While some genetic epidemiologists consider testing for the CHEK2 allele in principle ready for the clinic, many clinicians and epidemiologists hold
that screening is not justiﬁed. This is due to problems in the interpretation of tests for ‘low penetrance’ mutations; furthermore, the risk estimations are considered still
inconclusive: for instance, a population-based study from Sweden, published in late 2006, found no association of the CHEK2 with breast cancer (Einarsdottir et al., 2006).
61
As the p53 study by Høyer et al. (2002) exempliﬁes, the ﬁeld of environmental health research also incorporates molecular and genetic markers. This focus of research in turn
modiﬁes conceptual frameworks of risk assessment: in toxicogenomics, genetic susceptibility towards exposure moves centre stage (Shostak, 2005; Bauer, 2006).
62
As for the term ‘biovalue’, I refer to Waldby (2002) and Rose & Novas (2005).
60

426

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

7. Conclusions
This paper has approached epidemiology as a practice of collecting and traced selected data trajectories of a large-scale cohort
study. The analysis of two re-assemblages of data from the Østerbro study—in aetiological studies of breast cancer—has exposed the
role of data mining and record linkage in stabilising biomedical
knowledge at a population level. Various data strategies of epidemiological research practice can be described: active gathering of
new variables and samples in a deﬁned study design is key to
large-scale prospective follow-up studies. Mining data from registries refers to the deployment of already existing data—data recorded in other contexts but used for epidemiological research—
such as routine data, for example social statistics, cause of death
data, or, in the case of the Nordic countries, data from central population registries. Recombining information entails a re-assemblage of data into novel constellations, which re-evaluate
determinants and outcomes based on molecular techniques. In
these re-arrangements, data travel over time, across levels and
context of investigation, whilst they continue to carry on contextual categories.
In this sense, epidemiological knowledge generation follows a
pragmatic approach, studying statistical associations by making
use of the data at hand. Luc Berlivet (2005a, pp. 57–58) has pointed
to Austin Bradford Hill’s ‘pragmatics of risk factor epidemiology’,
where the epistemological questions came to be regulated by a
set of causality criteria and conventions. While this pragmatism
is compatible with the ‘regulatory objectivity’ (Cambrosio et al.,
2005) that is paramount to highly regulated rigorous methodologies, epidemiological practices with data also entail ﬂexibility in
the multiple data re-assemblages. As to the Østerbro data, the original cardiovascular prevention study is reshufﬂed into aetiological
studies on breast cancer by data mining and recombination. Record
linkage and new measurements on tissue samples can be brought
to work in different conceptual frameworks and contexts: for instance in their different data re-assemblages, the two epidemiological investigations based on the Østerbro data establish different
articulations as to breast cancer aetiology.
Epidemiological research such as the Østerbro study is multidisciplinary and brings together a range of techniques from ﬁeld sciences and the laboratory; the database functions as a local
platform for hypothesis testing, modelling and simulation. While
in many ways, the epidemiological investigation of disease rates
and risks is similar to quantitative social science and demography,
Paolo Vineis has stressed that, compared to the social sciences,
‘epidemiology makes use more often of study designs that simulate
experiments, than of surveys in the general population’ (Vineis,
2005, p. 349). The experimental conﬁguration applied to data
and sample collections is paramount to the epistemic value epidemiologists attribute to their studies.
Computerised record linkage and multivariate modelling are
key epistemic techniques instrumental to the simulation of experimental approaches in epidemiology. In data (re)arrangements,
population-based ‘quasi-experimental’ comparisons are projected
back in time and retrospectively embedded in historical cohort
studies, such as in the nested case-control studies. Mediated by
the architecture of a nested case-control study, questionnaire data,
tissue samples and genetic or environmental aetiologies are
recombined in a new constellation (conceived as retrospectively
enabled comparison) and navigated with regression modelling;
in this way epidemiological techniques construct retrospective
data experiments in silico. Thus, epidemiology works through
large-scale data generation and data networking combined with
the simulation of experiments using observational data. As much
as about designing original studies, successful epidemiology is

about securing long-term access to data and samples as future resources, in this case to the biobank and the database of a long-term
follow-up study and to population registries. Collecting and
observing as well as experimenting and simulating are deeply
entangled in epidemiological research.
Studying epidemiology’s practices of record linkage focuses on
the data organisation and conﬁguration, thereby shedding light
on the epistemic status of databases. Inspired by the science studies’ mode of following things and molecules, I propose to also track
the less tangible ‘digital trajectories’ of data and data collections
over time and across contexts. As an analytic strategy in the study
of epidemiological knowledge, this can help describe how local
data and samples are enrolled into contingent yet highly mobile
risk estimates, eventually becoming signiﬁcant to public health.
Moreover, this approach can allow insight into the ﬂexible architectures of epidemiological research which, despite their signiﬁcance in biomedical science, in evidence-based medicine and in
health policy, have remained largely unexplored.
Acknowledgements
Research for this paper has been conducted as part of the project ‘Danish Biomedicine, 1955–2005: Integrating Medical Museology and the Historiography of Recent Biomedicine’ (funded by the
Novo Nordisk Foundation) at the Medical Museion, University of
Copenhagen. I am grateful to the researchers of the Copenhagen
City Heart Study who shared their knowledge and experience with
me. For the exploration of collecting practices in epidemiology, the
Ischia Summer School on the History of the Life Sciences 2005 provided much inspiration at the early stage of this work. I would like
to thank Sniff Andersen Nexø, Jan Eric Olsén, Hanne Jessen, Adam
Bencard, Søren Bak-Jensen, Thomas Söderqvist and all participants
in the Medical Museion seminars; I thank Signild Vallgårda and
Christine Hanke for critical reading of earlier drafts, and Cecily Palmer for help with language revision. Many thanks also to the two
anonymous reviewers of this journal for their insightful comments
and valuable suggestions.

References
Ahmed, M., & Rahman, N. (2006). ATM and breast cancer susceptibility. Oncogene,
25, 5906–5911.
Amsterdamska, O. (2005). Demarcating epidemiology. Science, Technology, and
Human Values, 30(1), 17–51.
Andersen, T. F., Madsen, M., Jørgensen, J., Mellemkjoer, L., & Olsen, J. H. (1999). The
Danish National Hospital Register: A valuable source of data for modern health
sciences. Danish Medical Bulletin, 46(3), 263–268.
Antoniou, A. C., & Easton, D. F. (2006). Models of genetic susceptibility to breast
cancer. Oncogene, 25, 5898–5906.
Antoniou, A. C., Pharoah, P. D. P., Easton, D. F., & Evans, D. G. (2006). BRCA1
and
BRCA2
cancer
risk.
Journal
of
Clinical
Oncology,
24(29),
3312–3313.
Appadurai, A. (1988). Introduction: Commodities and the politics of value. In A.
Appadurai (Ed.), The social life of things (pp. 3–63). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Appleyard, M. (1989). The Copenhagen City Heart Study. Østerbroundersøgelsen. A
book of tables with data from the ﬁrst examination (1976–1978) and a ﬁve year
follow-up (1981–1983). Scandinavian Journal of Social Medicine Suppl., 41,
1–160.
Aronowitz, R. A. (1998). Making sense of illness. Science, society, and disease.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bauer, S. (2006). The genomics of environmental response: Re/visions in risk
assessment? In A. Bammé, G. Getzinger, & B. Wieser (Eds.), Yearbook 2006 of the
Institute for Advanced Studies on Science, Technology and Society (pp. 121–138).
Munich/Vienna: Proﬁl.
Bech-Danielsen, A. (1998). Pesticider gav brystkrft. Politiken, 5 December, Sect. 1, 5.
Bell, D. W., Varley, J. M., Szydlo, T. E., Kang, D. H., Wahrer, D. C., Shannon, K. E.,
Lubratovich, M., Verselis, S. J., Isselbacher, K. J., Fraumeni, J. F., Birch, J. M., Li, F.
P., Garber, J. E., & Haber, D. A. (1999). Heterozygous germ line hCHK2 mutations
in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Science, 286, 2528–2531.
Berkman, L., & Kawachi, I. (Eds.). (2000). Social epidemiology. New York: Oxford
University Press.

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428
Berlivet, L. (1999). Argumentation scientiﬁque et espace publique: La quête de
l’objectivité dans les controversies autour de ‘risque de santé’. In B. Francois & E.
¨ques: Acteurs, arènes et rhétoriques des débats
Neveu (Eds.), Espaces publics mosaı
publics contemporains (pp. 185–208). Rennes: Presses Universitaires de Rennes.
Berlivet, L. (2005a). ‘Association or causation’? The debate on the scientiﬁc status of
epidemiology, 1945–c.1965. In V. Berridge (Ed.), Making health policy: Networks
in research and policy after 1945 (pp. 43–74). Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Berlivet, L. (2005b). Exigence scientiﬁque et isolement institutionnel: L’essor
contrarié de l’épidémiologie française dans la seconde moitié du XXe siècle.
In G. Jorland, A. Opinel, & G. Weisz (Eds.), Body counts: Medical quantiﬁcation in
historical & sociological perspectives (pp. 335–358). Montreal: McGill-Queen’s
University Press.
Berridge, V. (2005). Making health policy: Networks in research and policy after 1945.
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Bourret, P. (2005). BRCA patients and clinical collectives: New conﬁgurations of
action in cancer genetics practices. Social Studies of Science, 35(1),
41–68.
Breslow, N. E., & Day, N. E. (1980). Statistical methods in cancer research, Vol. I. The
analysis of case-control studies. IARC Scientiﬁc Publications, 32. Lyon: ARC.
Breslow, N. E., & Day, N. E. (1987). Statistical methods in cancer research, Vol. II. The
design and analysis of cohort studies. IARC Scientiﬁc Publications, 82. Lyon.
Brody, J. G., & Rudel, R. A. (2003). Environmental pollutants and breast cancer.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 111(8), 1007–1019.
Brown, P., McCormick, S., Mayer, B., Zavestocki, S., Morello-Frosch, R., Gasior
Altmann, R., & Senier, L. (2006). ‘A lab of our own’: Environmental causation of
breast cancer and challenges to the dominant epidemiological paradigm.
Science, Technology, and Human Values, 31, 499–536.
Cambrosio, A., Keating, P., Schlich, T., & Weisz, G. (2006). Regulatory objectivity and
the generation and management of evidence in medicine. Social Science and
Medicine, 63(1), 189–199.
Chadarevian, S. de. (1998). Following molecules: Hemoglobin between the clinic
and the laboratory. In S. deChadarevian & H. Kamminga (Eds.), Molecularizing
biology and medicine: New practices and alliances, 1910–1970s (pp. 171–201).
Amsterdam: Harwood.
Chen, S., Iversen, E. S., Friebel, T., Finkelstein, D., Webe, B. L., Eisen, A., Peterson, L. E.,
Schildkraut, J. M., Isaacs, C., Peshkin, B. N., Corio, C., Leondaridis, L., Tomlinson,
G., Dutson, D., Kerber, R., Amos, C. I., Strong, L. C., Berry, D. A., Euhus, D. M., &
Parmigiani, G. (2006). Characterization of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a
large United States sample. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 24(6), 863–871.
Copenhagen City Heart Study. (n.d.). http://www.copenhagencityheartstudy.dk/
sider/artikler.htm. (Accessed 15 May 2008)
Daston, L. (Ed.). (2005). Things that talk. Cambridge MA: Zone books.
Daston, L., & Galison, P. (1992). The image of objectivity. Representations, 50,
81–128.
Dawber, T. R., Meadors, G. F., & Moore, F. E. Jr., (1951). Epidemiological approaches
to heart disease: The Framingham Study. American Journal of Public Health, 4(3),
279–281.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1988). A thousand plateaus. London: Athlone.
Desrosières, A. (1998). The politics of large numbers: A history of statistical reasoning.
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Dørge, H. (1998). En giftig sag. Weekendavisen, 23 October, section1, 4.
Einarsdottir, K., Rosenberg, L. U., Humphreys, K., Bonnard, C., Palmgren, J., Li, Y., Li,
Y., Chia, K. S., Liu, E. T., Hall, P., Liu, J., & Wedren, S. (2006). Comprehensive
analysis of the ATM, CHEK2 and ERBB2 genes in relation to breast tumour
characteristics and survival: A population-based case-control and follow-up
study. Breast Cancer Research, 8, R67.
Ejlertsen, B., & Gerdes, A.-M. (2007). Arvelig brystkrft: Behandling og
forebyggelse. Ugeskrift for Lger, 169, 2972.
ERICA Research Group. (1988). The CHD Risk-Map of Europe: The 1st Report of the
WHO-ERICA Project. European Heart Journal, 9(Suppl. I), 1–36.
Feinstein, A. R. (1985). Clinical epidemiology: The architecture of clinical research.
Philadelphia: Saunders.
Fischerman, K., & Mouridsen, H. T. (1988). Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group
(DBCG). Structure and results of the organization. Acta Oncologica, 27, 593–596.
Fisher, R. A. (1925). Statistical methods for research workers. Edinburgh: Tweeddale
Court.
Fisherman, K., & Mouridsen, H. T. (1977). Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group
(DBCG). Ugeskrift Lger, 139(42), 2493–2494.
Foucault, M. (1973). The birth of the clinic: An archaeology of medical perception.
London: Tavistock.
Frank, L. (2000). Epidemiology: When an entire country is a cohort. Science,
287(5462), 2398–2399.
Frank, L. (2003). Epidemiology: The epidemiologist’s dream: Denmark. Science,
301(5630), 163.
Gaudillière, J.-P. (2005). Introduction: Drug trajectories. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 36(4), 603–611.
‘Genpub’, University of Copenhagen. (n.d.). http://genpub.pubhealth.ku.dk/
postgeno_en/Public_Health_Genomics/. (Accessed 15 May 2008)
Gerdes, A.-M. (2006). Presse, etik og genetisk screening. Ugeskrift for Lger, 168(40),
3448.
Hacking, I. (1990). The taming of chance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hagerup, L., Eriksen, M., Schroll, M., Hollnagel, H., Agner, E., & Larsen, S. (1981). The
Glostrup Population Studies collection of epidemiologic tables. Reference values
for use in cardiovascular population studies. Scandinavian Journal of Social
Medicine Suppl., 20, 1–112.
Heesen, A. te., & Spary, E. (Eds.). (2001). Sammeln als Wissen. Göttingen: Wallstein.

427

Henderson, B., Pike, M., Bernstein, L., & Ross, R. (1996). Breast cancer. In D.
Schottenfeld & J. F. Fraumeni (Eds.), Cancer epidemiology and prevention
(pp. 1022–1039). New York: Oxford University Press.
Hill, A. B. (1965). The environment and disease: Association or causation.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 58, 295–300.
Hill, A. B. (1971). Principles of medical statistics. London: The Lancet Limited (First
published 1937).
Hine, C. (2006). Databases as scientiﬁc instruments and their role in the ordering of
scientiﬁc work. Social Studies of Science, 36(2), 269–298.
Høyer, A. P., Jørgensen, T., Grandjeau, P., Brock, J. W., & Hartvig, H. B. (1998).
Organochlorine
exposure
and
breast
cancer.
Lancet,
352,
1816–1820.
Høyer, A. P., Jørgensen, T., Grandjeau, P., & Brock, J. W. (2000a). Organochlorine
exposure and breast cancer survival. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 52,
323–330.
Høyer, A. P., Jørgensen, T., Grandjeau, P., & Hartvig, H. B. (2000b). Repeated
measurements of organochlorine exposure and breast cancer risk (Denmark).
Cancer Causes Control, 11, 177–184.
Høyer, A. P., Grandjeau, P., Jørgensen, T., Brock, J. W., & Hartvig, H. B. (2000c).
Organiske klorede forbindinger og brystkrft. Ugeskrift Lger, 162(7), 922–926.
Høyer, A. P., Jørgensen, T., Rank, F., & Grandjeau, P. (2001). Organochlorine
exposures inﬂuence on breast cancer risk and survival according to estrogen
receptor status: A Danish cohort-nested case-control study. BMC Cancer, 1, 8.
Høyer, A. P., Jørgensen, T., Rank, F., Grandjeau, P., & Hartvig, H. B. (2002).
Organochlorines, p53 mutations in relation to breast cancer risk and survival:
A Danish cohort-nested case-control study. Breast Cancer Research and
Treatment, 71, 59–65.
Johansen, H. C. (2003). Danish population history 1600–1939. Odense: University of
Southern Denmark Press.
Jørgensen,
T.
(2004).
Epidemiologisk
forskning
gennem
40
år:
Befolkningsundersøgelserne i Glostrup—Center for Sygdomsforebyggelse—
Forskningscenter for Forebyggelse og Sundhed. Ugeskrift Lger, 166(15–16),
1425–1428.
Juel, K., & Helweg-Larsen, K. (1999). The Danish registers of causes of death. Danish
Medical Bulletin, 46, 354–357.
Kamph, L. (2006). Dansk bioanalytikere, ‘Østerbroundersøgelsens biobank atter
uvurderlig’ (The Copenhagen City Heart Study’s biobank once again invaluable).
http://www.dbio.dk/neobuilder.2006080110383930900056641.html.
(Accessed 15 May 2008)
Kannel, W. B. (2000). The Framingham Study: Its 50-year legacy and future promise.
Journal of Atherosclerosis and Thrombosis, 6(2), 60–66.
Keating, P., & Cambrosio, A. (2000). Biomedical platforms. Conﬁgurations, 8,
337–387.
Keating, P., & Cambrosio, A. (2003). Biomedical platforms: Realigning the normal and
the pathological in late-twentieth-century medicine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keys, A., Menotti, A., Aravanis, C., Blackburn, H., Djordevic, B. S., Buzina, R., Dontas,
A. S., Fidanza, F., Karvonen, M. J., Kimura, N., et al. (1984). The Seven Countries
Study: 2,289 deaths in 15 years. Preventive Medicine, 13(2), 141–154.
Krieger, N. (1994). Epidemiology and the web of causation: Has anyone seen the
spider? Social Science and Medicine, 39, 887–903.
Krieger, N. (2001). Theories for social epidemiology in the twenty-ﬁrst century: An
ecosocial perspective. International Journal of Epidemiology, 30(4), 668–677.
Krieger, N., Wolff, M. S., Hiatt, R. A., Rivera, M., Vogelman, J., & Orentreich, N. (1994).
Breast cancer and serum organochlorines: A prospective study among white,
black, and Asian women. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 86(8), 589–599.
Lamm, G. on behalf of the WHO ERICA study group. (1989). The risk-map of Europe.
Annals of Medicine, 21(3), 190–192.
Last, J. (1983). dictionary of epidemiology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through
society. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Latour, B. (1988). The pasteurization of France. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Latour, B. (1993). We had never been modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life: The social construction of scientiﬁc
facts. Los Angeles: Sage.
Lenoir, T. (1999). Shaping biomedicine as an information science. In T. Bellardo
Hahn, M. E. Bowden, & R. V. Williams (Eds.), Proceedings of the 1998 Conference
on the History and Heritage of Science Information Systems. ASIS Monograph Series
(pp. 27–45). Medford, NJ: Information Today.
Loiborg, S., Brøndum-Nielsen, K., Daasnes, C., Melbye, M., Saugmann-Jensen, P., von
Linstow, H., Aarø-Hansen, N., & Rasmussen, B. (2002). Redegørelse om biobanker.
Forslåg til retlig regulering af biobanker inden for sundhedsområdet. Betnkning
nr. 1414. Indenrigs- og Sundhedsministeriet. Copenhagen.
Löwy, I. (1998). Immunotherapy of cancer from Coley’s toxins to interferons:
Molecularization of a therapeutic practice. In S. deChadarevian & H. Kamminga
(Eds.), Molecularizing biology and medicine: New practices and alliances, 1910–
1970s (pp. 249–271). Amsterdam: Harwood.
Magnello, E. (2002). The introduction of mathematical statistics into medical
research: The roles of Karl Pearson, Major Greenwood and Austin Bradford Hill.
In E. Magnello & A. Hardy (Eds.), The road to medical statistics (pp. 95–123).
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Magnello, E., & Hardy, A. (Eds.). (2002). The road to medical statistics. Amsterdam:
Rodopi.
Mariotti, S., Capocaccia, R., Farchi, G., Menotti, A., Verdecchia, A., & Keys, A. (1981).
Differences in the incidence rate of coronary heart disease between North and

428

S. Bauer / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 39 (2008) 415–428

South European cohorts of the Seven Countries Study as partially explained by
risk factors. European Heart Journal, 3, 481–487.
Marks, H. (1997). The progress of experiment: Science and therapeutic reform in the
United States, 1900–1990. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Matthews, J. R. (1995). Quantiﬁcation and the quest for medical certainty. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
McMahon, B., Pugh, T., & Ipsen, J. (1960). Epidemiologic methods. Boston: Little,
Brown & Company.
Melbye, M. (2001). Registerforskning: Enestående danske muligheder. Copenhagen:
IT- og Forskningsministeriet.
Mendelsohn, A. (1998). From eradication to equilibrium: How epidemics became
complex after World War I. In C. Lawrence & G. Weisz (Eds.), Greater than the
parts: Holism in biomedicine, 1920–1950 (pp. 303–331). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Meulengracht, A., & Madsen, M. (1982). Registre indenfor sundhedsområdet: En
oversigt over registreringssystemer, der kan anvendes i epidemiologisk forskning og
i sundhedsplanlgning. København: Dansk Institut for Klinisk Epidemiologi.
Morabia, A. (2005). A history of epidemiologic methods and concepts. Basel:
Birkhäuser.
Mortensen, P. B. (2004). Registerforskning i Danmark. Norsk Epidemiologi, 14(1),
121–124.
Nevanlinna, H., & Bartek, J. (2006). The CHEK2 gene and inherited breast cancer
susceptibility. Oncogene, 25, 5912–5919.
Nielsen, G. (2006). Et tredje brystkrftgen kortlagt. Berlingske Tidende, 1 August,
Sect. 1, 3.
Nordestgaard, B., Agerholm-Larsen, B., Wittrup, H. H., & Tybjrg-Hansen, A. (1996).
A prospective cardiovascular population study used in genetic epidemiology:
The Copenhagen City Heart Study. Scandinavian Journal of Clinical Laboratory
Investigation, 56(Suppl. 226), 65–71.
Oldenburg, R. A., Kroeze-Jansema, K., Kraan, J., Morreau, H., Klijn, J. G.,
Hoogerbrugge, N., Ligtenberg, M. J., van Asperen, C. J., Vasen, H. F., Meijers, C.,
Meijers-Heijboer, H., de Bock, T. H., Cornelisse, C. J., & Devilee, P. (2003). The
CHEK2*1100delC variant acts as a breast cancer risk modiﬁer in non-BRCA1/
BRCA2 multiple-case families. Cancer Research, 63(23), 8153–8157.
Olsen, J. H., Mellemkjr, L., & Friis, S. (2004). Fra krfttlling til cancerregister.
Ugeskrift Lger, 166(15/16), 1458–1461.
Oppenheimer, G. M. (2005). Becoming the Framingham Study, 1947–1950.
American Journal of Public Health, 95(4), 602–610.
Pálsson, G. (2005). Of Althings! In B. Latour & P. Weibel (Eds.), Making things public
(pp. 250–257). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Paneth, N., Susser, E., & Susser, M. (2005). Origins and early development of the
case-control study. In A. Morabia (Ed.), A history of epidemiologic methods and
concepts (pp. 291–311). Basel: Birkhäuser.
Parascandola, M. (2005). Epidemiology in transition: Tobacco and lung cancer in the
1950s. In G. Jorland, A. Opinel, & G. Weisz (Eds.), Body counts: Medical
quantiﬁcation in historical and sociological perspectives (pp. 226–248).
Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Parry, B. (2004). Trading the genome: Investigating the commodiﬁcation of bioinformation. New York: Columbia University Press.
Parthasarathy, S. (2005). Architectures of genetic medicine: Comparing genetic
testing for breast cancer in the USA and the UK. Social Studies of Science, 35(1),
5–40.
Pearce, S. (1995). Collecting as a medium and message. In E. Hooper-Greenhill (Ed.),
Museum, media, message (pp. 15–23). London: Routledge.
Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency & science. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Pickstone, J. (2000). Ways of knowing. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Pickstone, J. (2007). Working knowledges before and after circa 1800: Practices
and disciplines in the history of science, technology and medicine. Isis, 98,
489–516.
Porter, T. M. (1995). Trust in numbers: The pursuit of objectivity in science and public
life. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Porter, T. M. (2000). Life insurance, medical testing, and the management of
mortality. In L. Daston (Ed.), Biographies of scientiﬁc objects (pp. 226–246).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rabinow, P. (2003). Anthropos today: Reﬂections on modern equipment. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Rheinberger, H.-J. (1997). Towards a theory of epistemic things: Synthesizing proteins
in the test tube. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Rose, N., & Novas, C. (2005). Biological citizenship. In A. Ong & S. J. Collier (Eds.),
Global assemblages: Technologies, politics, and ethics as anthropological problems
(pp. 439–463). Oxford: Blackwell.
Rothman, K., & Greenland, S. (1998). Modern epidemiology. Raven: Lippincott.
Schnohr, P., Jensen, G., Lange, P., Scharling, H., & Appleyard, M. (2001). The
Copenhagen City Heart Study, Østerbroundersøgelsen: Tables with data from
the third examination 1991–1994. European Heart Journal, 3(Suppl. H), H1–H83.
Shostak, S. (2005). The emergence of toxicogenomics: A case study of
molecularization. Social Studies of Science, 35(3), 367–403.
Snedeker, S. (2001). Pesticides and breast cancer risk: A review of DDT, DDE, and
dieldrin. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(Suppl. 1), 35–47.
Storm, H. (1991). The Danish Cancer Registry: A self-reporting national cancer
registration system with elements of active data collection. In O. Jensen, D.
Parkin, R. MacLennan, C. S. Muir, & R. G. Skeet (Eds.), Cancer registration:
Principles and methods (pp. 220–236). IARC Monograph No. 95. Lyon:
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC).
Strasser, B. (2006). Collecting and experimenting: The moral economies of
biological research, 1960–1980s. In S. de Chadarevian, & H.-J. Rheinberger
(Eds.), History and epistemology of molecular biology and beyond: Problems and
perspectives (pp. 105–123). Preprint, 310. Berlin: Max Planck Institute for the
History of Science.
Susser, M. (1991). What is a cause and how do we know one? A grammar for
pragmatic epidemiology. American Journal of Epidemiology, 133(7),
635–648.
Susser, M. (1999). Should the epidemiologist be a social scientist or a molecular
biologist? International Journal of Epidemiology, 28(5), S1019–S1022.
The CHEK2-Breast Cancer-Case Control Consortium. (2004). CHEK2*1100delC and
susceptibility to breast Cancer: A collaborative analysis involving 10,860 breast
cancer cases and 9,065 controls from 10 studies. American Journal of Human
Genetics, 74, 1175–1182.
The CHEK2-Breast Cancer Consortium. (2002). Low penetrance susceptibility to
breast cancer due to CHEK2*1100delC in noncarriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations. Nature Genetics, 31, 55–59.
Trostle, J. A. (2005). Epidemiology and culture. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Tunstall-Pedoe, H. for the WHO MONICA project (Ed.). (2003). MONICA Monograph
and multimedia sourcebook. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Unger, M., & Olsen, J. (1980). Organochlorine compounds in the adipose tissue of
deceased people with and without cancer. Environmental Research, 23(2),
257–263.
Unger, M., Kiaer, H., Blichert-Toft, M., Olsen, J., & Clausen, J. (1984). Organochlorine
compounds in human breast fat from deceased with and without breast cancer
and in a biopsy material from newly diagnosed patients undergoing breast
surgery. Environmental Research, 34(1), 24–28.
Unger, M., Olsen, J., & Clausen, J. (1982). Organochlorine compounds in the adipose
tissue of deceased persons with and without cancer: A statistical survey of some
potential confounders. Environmental Research, 29(2), 371–376.
Vahteristo, P., Bartkova, J., Eerola, H., Syrjäkoski, K., Ojala, S., Kilpivaara, O.,
Tamminen, A., Kononen, J., Aittomäki, K., Heikkilä, P., Holli, K., Blomqvist, C.,
Bartek, J., Kallioniemi, O. P., & Nevanlinna, H. (2002). A CHEK2 genetic variant
contributing to a substantial fraction of familial breast cancer. American Journal
of Human Genetics, 71(2), 432–438.
Vallgårda, S. (2007). Public health policies: A Scandinavian model? Scandinavian
Journal of Public Health, 35(2), 205–211.
Vineis, P. (1997). Proof in observational medicine. Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health, 51, 9–13.
Vineis, P. (2005). Causality in epidemiology. In A. Morabia (Ed.), A history of
epidemiologic methods and concepts (pp. 337–349). Basel: Birkhäuser.
Waldby, C. (2002). Stem cells, tissue cultures and the production of biovalue. Health:
An Interdisciplinary Journal for the Social Study of Health. Illness and Medicine,
6(3), 305–323.
Weischer, M., Bojesen, S. E., Tybrg-Hansen, A., Axelsson, C. K., & Nordestgaard, B.
G. (2006). Svar (Debat). Ugeskrift for Lger, 168, 3448.
Weischer, M., Bojesen, S. E., Tybrg-Hansen, A., Axelsson, C. K., & Nordestgaard, B.
G. (2007). Increased risk of breast cancer associated with CHEK2*1100delC.
Journal of Clinical Oncology, 25(1), 57–63. (Epublished 31 July 2006)
Weisz, G. (2005). From clinical counting to evidence-based medicine. In G. Jorland,
A. Opinel, & G. Weisz (Eds.), Body counts: Medical quantiﬁcation in historical &
sociological perspectives (pp. 377–393). Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.

