Searching and Selecting. If Google Is the Answer, What Was the
Question?

1

Searching and Selecting. If Google Is the Answer, What Was the
Question?

“Search is the watchword of the information age.” (Stark 2009: 1)

Introduction 
Recently, a flood of literature on Google and search machines has been published, highlighting
their importance for the contemporary world (for a good start, see Becker 2010). One tenor of
this literature is that Google has become one of the biggest firms with one of the most intriguing
business models today (Auletta 2009; Battelle 2005; Lowe 2009; Vise 2005). But why is this of
interest, apart from the economic fact that Google is a big firm with a near monopoly? Several
authors claim that Google changes the way we conceive of information (Battelle 2005; Halavais
2009; Specter 2000; Stross 2008; Vaidhyanathan 2011), and, in a more pessimistic formulation,
poses even a danger for our knowledge and will make us collectively “stupid” (Carr 2008; Ichbiah
2007; Jeanneney 2007). The underlying assumption is that Google and the Internet completely
redefine how we search. However, in none of these books we find an analysis of what searching
was before Google. The authors simply assume that Google represents a revolution compared to
an undefined and now superfluous earlier form of searching.
The historian of technology David Gugerli has made a remarkable first step to identify some
non-Internet based search machines that led to Google (Gugerli 2009a). Seen from this
viewpoint Google is foremost a search technology. This implies a history of search machines,
implying that search before Google was also machine-based and an object, if only a Butler
(Krajewski 2010). But this unnecessarily restricts the view to a particular type of machine, and to
a particular set of searches that people do.1 This discourse understands information as academic,
explicit and written knowledge. But people and organisations search for many other things:
2

products to buy, partners to mate, politicians to elect, know-how for everyday tasks, and new
knowledge or objects that do not yet exist.
In social theory, the rise of search machines has triggered little interest. Sociological theorizations
of the Internet and of information society tend to focus on the changes induced by the internet
to the form and mostly the stratification of societies, on the relationship of hierarchies and
networks and of the various uses that people make of the Internet and computers (Golumbia
2009; Dijk 2000; Mansell 2009; Tredinnick 2008; Castells 2009; Cavanagh 2007). The existing
literature on general search is written from the viewpoint of information and library sciences and
focuses on best ways to search, rather than showing an interest in searching as a general social
process (for an overview: Baeza-Yates 2011; Case 2008).
David Stark is probably the only social theorist, who has attempted to theorize searching in more
general terms. For him, searching is a key concept for organizational theory, because it is “the
watchword of the information age” that “best exemplifies the challenges of contemporary
organizations” (Stark 2009: 1). Stark has also pointed out that the focus on search machines is
too narrow, because their search results “are of precisely the wrong kind to answer the more
fundamental problems confronting organizations today” (Stark 2009: 1). However, Stark
concentrates on a theory of contemporary organizations and the problem of innovation. His
focus is on the distinction between what Guha et al. call navigational searches, where people
know what they are looking for, and research searches, where they are looking for the unknown
(Guha, McCool and Miller 2003; Stark 2009: 166-183). This is an important distinction, and I
return to it later, but it is only a first step, if we want to explore more seriously Stark’s contention
that “search is a fundamental human activity” (Stark 2009: 169). To do so, we need a more finegrained and more general theory that transcends the specific problems of contemporary
organizations.

3

This article is thus an attempt to develop a general socio-theoretical vocabulary to describe search
procedures and their historical changes. This theory must be general enough not only to describe
search machines, but also other search procedures. It must also be specific enough, most notably
with respect to a theory of technology, to understand the difference between different search
machines, and between search machines and other search procedures.
We can then start to ask: How do people and organisations search? What do they search for?
When do they search? Why do they search? What are the instruments and technologies for
searching? How and why do search practices differ and change in history and in different places?
How are search practices learned and adapted across fields, times and contexts?
The theory of searching and selecting is a first attempt to develop a general theoretical language
that can describe such varying search and selection procedures in different contexts and to
therefore allow thick descriptions of search procedures among different times and places and
different technical environments.
I start by elaborating a general framework to analyze searching and selecting procedures. This
framework allows then to analyze both the technization but also the de-technization of search
procedures. Second, I show that historically, unlike what the discourse on search machines
stipulates, we do not only witness a permanent technization of search and selection procedures,
but also its opposite, which I describe as a turn to indeterminate search and selection procedures.
I demonstrate this turn with cases from four cases central to sociological analyses, such as the
arts (aleatoric compositions), organizational decision-making, epistemology (Feyerabend’s
philosophy of science), and love (speed dating).

Towards a Theory of Searching 
To develop a theory of searching and selecting requires first to understand what these procedures
are, and what a search machine is. In “Search Machines. The World as Database” David Gugerli
4

has undertaken an important step towards such a theorization (Gugerli 2009a).2 His important
contribution consists in defining search machines in broader terms than mere Internet search
machines. In his book, he discusses four case studies from the 1950ies-1970ies as examples of
precursors of search machines: First, dragnet investigation by the German police in the 1970ies;
second, a TV-show called “Was bin ich?” (“What am I?”), where celebrity participants have to
guess occupations of strangers; third, another TV-show with the name “Aktenzeichen XY” (“file
number XY”), where the audience helps to find suspected criminals; and fourth, relational
databases as invented by Edgar F. Codd. Based on these examples, Gugerli defines a search
machine as a machine with the following qualities (Gugerli 2009a: 15):
1. It searches for goals that can be named (i.e.: “search for a man with a hat”, rather than: “search
for this guy who knocked me down, but I can’t really explain how he looked like”).
2. It looks in a defined space of addresses (i.e.: “search among all persons with a French
passport”, rather than: “Search among those who could have been nearby, when I was knocked
down”).
3. It follows a strict routine („program“), which renders search machines inherently „openended“ (i.e.: Search for the first match in a database, start with the beginning of the alphabet and
then go letter by letter until you end at Z”. Rather than: “Take the first database entry that you
encounter”).3
The definition is already helpful, because it steers away from the narrow focus on Internet search.
Importantly, it allows making a distinction between searches with search machines and those
without search machines. It allows to define search ex-negativo and to define analogue searches.
Furthermore it allows writing a history of the technization of search procedures and the changes
in search procedures because of different search technologies.

5

A search then is simply an interaction between a search body and the world, in which the search
body screens the world (or parts thereof), to obtain an object the search body does not yet
possess or know about. The search body can be a human, but also an animal, a robot or an
organisation. The world consists of anything, both material objects as well as data or information
(i.e., one can search for a lemon, but also the information where lemons grow).
What Gugerli omits is the fact that searching alone is only half the cake. A search usually
immediately leads to a selecting operation, because it most often returns more than one item.
This is true in all his examples, and we need to theorize this further. But we now have a
framework for defining search/selection patterns (thereafter abbreviated as s/s patterns). We can
attempt to outline a general theory of s/s. To do so, we have to go a little bit more into the
details of the above three categories, search object, search space, search procedure and selection
procedure.

The Search Situation 
Each search is constituted by a search situation. A search situation is a kind of interaction and
not an intention of an actor. A search situation is any situation in which an actor (which can be a
non-human such as an animal, a robot or an organisation) switches to a register in which the
interaction is directed towards obtaining a search object. A search situation is thus defined by the
relationship between a search body and a search object, mediated by an s/s procedure, that often
contains a search machine (and a selection machine). The coupling of search body and object
starts a search situation and it is ended by selecting an object. The selected object then gets
attributed the state that it was searched and selected for – a politician is assigned mayor, a fact is
declared a truth, a person is declared lover or spouse – and the s/s situation ends. A search
situation can obviously comprise single individuals and a single object, but it can also be a vast
actor-network of persons and objects, as for example in Gugerli's example of “Aktenzeichen

6

XY”, or elections, where hundreds of experts, politicians, spin doctors and very complex
technologies are involved (Carson 2001).

1. Object 
Once a search has been instantiated, a search goal or a search object is selected. We can
differentiate three kinds of search. I build here on Gugerli’s assumption that search machines
always have defined search objects, which I would like to dispute. Guha et. al. have introduced
for the context of Internet search machines the distinction between “navigational search” and
“research search” (Guha, McCool and Miller 2003). In navigational search, the existence and the
address of the object is known ahead and the search only consists in finding this object. In
contrast, in research search the object is not known.
An example for a navigational search is when one searches for Dan Browns “Da Vinci Code” on
the Amazon site. This search is navigational because the search body already knows that this
book should be on the Amazon site and the search basically consists in a more or less speedy way
to get there. Other examples for navigational searches are searches for lost keys or all the
examples in Gugerli’s book. For example in “Aktenzeichen XY” the police must be able to
describe the criminals that they are searching, otherwise the TV-audience cannot help finding
them.
However, if Gugerli defines search machines as relying on a defined search object, he excludes
current and future internet “search machines” by definition. For, Guha et al. proposed the notion
of research search in the context of developing semantic search machines for the Internet.
Semantic search machines are search machines that can “understand” a natural language input.
Research searches are search procedures where a user “intended to denote an object about which
the user is trying to gather/research in- formation. There is no particular document which the
user knows about that s/he is trying to get to” (Guha, McCool and Miller 2003: 702). Here, only
a vague description of an object is known, but no address. This is for example the case, when I
7

try to find a “beautiful sofa” or a “thrilling movie” or if a firm tries to find a new employee. In
this case, the search body only has a vague idea what it is looking for, and the search is likely to
produce surprises. I might find out that the kind of sofa I am imagining does not exist, that other
people judge movies thrilling that I find boring or that all the possibly good employees do not
want to work for the wage the firm is offering. Current Internet search machines are still not very
good at doing research searches, but they do not completely fail.
Both of these kinds of search can be conducted with an Internet search machine. If a theory of
searching should be sufficiently general to accommodate all search procedures in society, then we
need to add a third type of search, namely what I would like to call productive searches. Here, the
existence of the search object itself is unknown and the search object is made to exist only with
the help of the search procedure. This is typically the case in scientific research or the arts, and it
is the kind of search that David Stark focuses on (Stark 2009: 163 ff.). The term “productive”
implies that without a given search procedure, the search object would never be found or not
even exist. The search object depends on the search procedure and is a result of it. In contrast,
both in navigational and in research search, the search object pre-exists independently of the
search procedure and has probably been found by other search bodies with similar or different
search procedures.
Typically, navigational and research search is proscriptive in the sense that the search procedures
for both of them can be (but must not be) pre-defined. For an Internet search machine, the
search procedure needs to be predefined to work. Otherwise the search machine cannot search.
Productive searches on the other hand are usually descriptive. One cannot precisely describe how a
new planet is to be found. Rather, one can only describe it after one has found a new star. The
correct search procedure how to find a star emerges along with the search object. As long as a
scientist has not found a new star, she does not know whether her search procedures are the
right ones. Only once a star has been found, the search procedure for having found this star can
8

be described.4 Google cannot find a new planet, because it can only find what it already knows
of, it is proscriptive.
Obviously it is not always possible to neatly define a search situation as navigational or research
search. For example, somebody looking for a partner might have a very precise idea – as can be
witnessed by reading partner ads: size, ethnicity, hobbies, profession, income etc. – for whom she
is looking, but she may also have no idea at all. Changing search procedures often have
repercussions for the status of search objects. For example, the invention of said partner ads
forces people who are looking for a partner to define their search objects and in predefined ways
at that.

2. Search Space 
Each s/s-procedure operates in a search space. A search space is not necessarily a physical space,
but the aggregation of addresses in which a search takes place. An address is an identifier for an
item that can be searched for. An address does not need to be well defined. For example a name
such as “Peter” can be an address.5 “Peter” is in many contexts a badly defined address, since
there are many people and other objects (such as pets) called “Peter” in the world, and the
address “Peter” contains no further help to select among the many Peters. A search space for a
“Peter“ can for example entail all first names in the world, or all males in Singapore, or all my
friends and their friends. We can distinguish the following search spaces:
a) A conceptual search space is defined by a descriptive concept that aggregates addresses, including
physical territories and language. A conceptual search space can be “France”, “all French
citizens”, “all member of McDonalds” or “everybody with red hair”.
b) A capability-based search space is defined by the capabilities of the search body, rather than her
rendering of the world. The most usual case is a language-based search space, since the capability
to search is often bound to language use, including sociolects. Most obviously this matters when
9

searching with Internet search machines. I receive quite different results when entering the Italian
word “pranzo” or the English word “lunch” even if they refer to the same thing.
Both conceptual and capability search spaces are foremost a product of the search body, and not
necessarily an implementation of search aids into the world. They limit the search procedure,
because the search body either voluntarily or involuntarily narrows down the items to be
searched. The other two search spaces are much more results of rendering the world according to
search needs and of previous search procedures.
c) A search space can be tagged, as is the case with the World Wide Web. In this case the
addresses have stable tags, which order them according to predefined criteria. In the World Wide
Web, words are tags themselves, because the Internet is searchable for words, whereas for
example images are not tags and need to be tagged separately. Very often, tagging builds on
conceptual search spaces. For example states routinely operate on their territory as conceptual search
spaces and spend a lot of energy to tag the items on their territory, both citizens (Scott 1998: 6471) and things such as roads, buildings (see: Tantner 2003). States enforce that people have first
and last names and that each building has a street name and a house number. Tagging is an
inherently political activity, since tagging has tremendous importance for search procedures. For
example in state performed conceptual searches, some people are tagged, namely those who live
legally in a given territory, whereas illegal migrants remain untagged, which omits them from
official statistics, but also denies them access to social services.
d) A search space can be defined by a trajectory: In this case search space is defined or restricted by
previous selecting operations, i.e. path-like selection procedures (see below). This is for example the
case in scientific research, when one is working with data sets and methodological procedures
established in previous s/s procedures. A search space based on a trajectory is also always
organised. That is, the search body knows already some of the properties of the search space and

10

the addresses it contains, a feature that is usually absent from capability-based or conceptual search
spaces.
e) Last, a search space can be addressed. Here the search space itself remains unknown, but it is
defined by the description of the search object. An example for this is “Aktenzeichen XY”,
where the wanted criminals are described and everybody who watches the show is assumed to
search for them, assuming they could be anywhere. The addressing of the search space in
“Aktenzeichen XY” is a direct reaction to the imperfect tagging of the search space. If every
person in the world would need to carry a machine that would permanently indicate his or her
whereabouts – as through the possibility to locate cell phones – then “Aktenzeichen XY” would
be unnecessary. Similarly, when issuing a call for papers for a scientific conference, the search
space is defined by the description of the papers sought, and not by knowing the universe of
those who might respond to the call for papers. In an addressed search space, it is not necessary
to have tagged search objects, since the search itself describes the space.
Obviously, several of these search space definitions can apply to a given search. For example, a
search for a lover can be both conceptual (territorial), capability (language) and trajectory based, if I
search for example with a word of mouth campaign within my closest friends, who all happen to
live in Palermo and only speak Italian.

3. Search Procedure 
A search procedure is any procedure that produces options to select from. We can distinguish the
following search procedures.
a) Immediate search procedures work by reducing the procedure to something outside the powers
of search bodies. For example, this can be the case when asking an oracle or a divine entity, but
also when using randomisation procedures. Immediate search procedures produce the most
unexpected results, because they are (supposedly) free from societal influences and interests,
11

which make them preferred in some situations, but also prone to critique in others. In the second
part of the article, I will look at a various immediate search procedures.
b) An authoritarian search procedure is a search procedure where the search body produces a
finite number of options without further recourse to due process except that the search body
ascribes or is ascribed the power to propose. This is for example the case when a firm searches a
new CEO and the board of directors simply gives a choice of two that were selected from their
own employees.
c) A call is a search procedure where the search body relies on the search object to answer to the
search. In a call the search body issues a statement of search to a public. A call is therefore
dependent on other actors to assist in a search. Typical examples are calls for papers for scientific
conferences or calls for job candidates.
These search procedures share that they are not influenced by previous events. Neither for a call,
an authoritarian or an immediate procedure does it matter what results previous search
procedures produced. I can issue a call for papers, and the result of the call is in no way limited
by who has previously attended a conference that I organised. The fourth search procedure is
different in this respect.
d) A path is a search procedure where the search object results from following a previous s/s
procedure already accomplished. A path procedure contains elements to create and limit options
at the same time and both, the limits and the newly created options are part of a track of previous
s/s patterns. This is most often the case in productive searches such as in scientific research or art.
“Thought styles” (Fleck 1935) or “paradigms” in Thomas Kuhns later parlance, accepted
methods and theories and artistic styles all depend on previous s/s patterns. New research builds
on these thought styles, methods and theories and varies them to produce new results.

12

4. Selection Procedure 
A selection procedure is a procedure that selects one or many objects from the results of the
search. The first three selection procedures are the same as the respective search procedures:
a) Immediate selection procedures produce results independently of the selection body. As in
immediate search procedures, this can be either the case with randomisation or divine
intervention.
b) In Authoritarian selection procedures a selection body simply decides without further
legitimation or discussion. Obviously, in many everyday s/s procedures this is the case, for
example when somebody selects a Yogurt from a shelf in a supermarket.
c) Path-dependent selection procedures select based on historical previous selections. However,
path selection procedures do not occur so much in science and the arts, but much more in other
contexts. For example many authoritarian decisions are in fact path decisions, since they are
taken according to previous decisions. Most people select the same Yogurt from the shelf,
because they have always selected this Yogurt. Similarly, many voters vote for the same party as
in the last elections, simply because they or even their family have always voted for this party.
While in science and the arts path-dependent search leads to new forms and insights, the
selection procedures are almost always authoritarian. Scientists simply know which result to work
with and artists simply know which sketch to use for elaboration and which one to destroy. The
idea to select data according to a path is inimical in science and the arts and is rather seen as an
obstacle in theories of both.
There are two more selection procedures, which do not exist for searching. While individual
persons can – but need not – perform the first three selection procedures, the last two are group
dependent by definition. They both reflect the problem that selection procedures, since they
narrow down given choice, need to deal with divergences in taste, knowledge and status between
13

selecting persons – much more so than search procedures that open up these selections in the
first place.
d) In vote a defined group of selectors vote between different search results. The obvious example
is political elections, but vote happens in many other contexts too.6 For example, a group of
friends may vote where to go for a day out, a club may vote on whether to take on new members,
a family may held a vote on which car to buy etc. In its purest form, a vote discards arguments in
favour of proportional power in the decision making process of the members. As immediate and
authoritarian procedures and unlike path procedures a vote procedure is in principle independent of
a previous s/s procedures.
e) The last selection procedure is discussion. Here a selection is made after a group of persons
weighs the options against each other. Clearly, often discussion simply precedes votes, but
sometimes discussions simply converge on a selection. In many everyday cases it seems it is in an
ad-hoc fashion decided whether discussion suffice or a vote is needed.
The theoretical disaggregation of s/s into two different procedures allows a very fine-grained
discussion and comparison of s/s procedures. It allows comparing many at first sight unrelated
s/s procedures and it allows analysing them in great detail. In theory, but also in reality, s/s
procedures can be combined in any way. It should also be apparent that for a given search object
different search procedures could be selected with different effects. For example, to search for a
partner any of these s/s procedures can be employed. In an immediate search one can ask an
oracle (She loves me, she loves me not) for whom to marry. Arranged marriages are examples for
authoritarian search, while putting up an ad in the New York Review of Books is an example for
a call. To decide to marry a friend of my deceased spouse for example would be a case of path.
Similarly, the selection procedure (If someone can’t decide) for a partner can be immediate (tossing
a coin), authoritarian (just taking a decision), path-dependent (selecting as ones parents already had
selected, for example according to religion or ethnicity), a vote (among ones friends), or discussion
14

(again among ones friends). In fact, the categorization proposed herewith allows many insightful
historical and cross-cultural studies of such variations in search procedures.

Historical Shifts of Search Procedures 
We can now derive a framework for comparative and historical analysis. The search machine
literature amounts to the thesis that search practices have historically become ever more
technologized. Accordingly, on all levels, from search object, search space to search procedure
(and even selection procedure, although this is rarely addressed) a shift occurred from the less
well defined to the better defined. More precisely, search procedures shift from authoritarian to
path and call procedures and search space shifts from conceptual (mostly territorial) to tagged and
addressed.
The examples in Gugerli’s book are proof of such a shift towards defining search spaces, search
objects and search procedures. For example “wer bin ich” attempted to identify persons with
occupations – rather than with political views or kinship, thereby narrowing the search space. For
Gugerli, this is proof of the modernisation of the German state after the war. Similarly, relational
databases, Aktenzeichen XY and Horst Herold's dragnet investigations were complex attempts to
define addresses, restrict search spaces and test varying search procedures. In this sense the
apotheosis of these precursors are today’s Internet search machines.
Historically, the enormous change that Google represents is not that its algorithm is better than
the one of its competitors. This is the source of the relative success of the business and the
wealth of its founders (Auletta 2009; Battelle 2005). Far more important is that the Internet is an
incredible apparatus to attach defined addresses to objects and thus completely uncouple searching
from a conceptual (territorial) search space and to invent a search technology that allows path
procedures to operate almost instantaneously in this enormous space of tags. The first important
inventions were not search machines, but the invention of the Internet address protocols TCP
and IP, because they allowed giving computers a defined address (Post 2009). The second and
15

most central invention is not a single invention, but the process of the ever-increasing attachment
of offline things and persons to internet addresses. This allows for understanding Internet
addresses as substitutes for things in the non-Internet world and to render “everything
searchable” (Brewer 2001). The central invention of Internet-shopping is basically to attribute
each product its own address, so that a search body can directly find and buy a lemon rather than
finding a store that might stock lemons. The next step, already used for example by mailing and
logistics firms is to attach each physical lemon an address and make it traceable, all the way from
field into the supermarket, to the dinner table and finally to the rubbish bin.
What Google has brought to the world is primarily that each object gets an address and is tagged
and that the search space has widened for most searches to be either global or merely language
restricted. This has gone so far that many searches that would have been naturally territorial or
trajectory based – such as those for a partner, an employee or shopping goods – are now merely
tagged. Because this is so, they need to be artificially reterritorialized (Kellerman 2002). Territory
becomes itself a tag. For example when searching for a flat on the Internet, or when looking for a
partner, a reterritorialization of the search is needed, because it is equally easy to find a new flat
or a new partner on the other half of the globe as next door. Thus the respective websites allow
restricting search by address.

Indeterminacy: On Widening Search Procedures 
The literature on search machines is misleading, because it only looks at Internet search machines
and what appear to be their precursors. This is a teleological history, with history converging in
an endpoint called Google. But the narrowing of search procedures is not simply a unidirectional
process. The goal of all the search machines that Gugerli describes is to enhance the precision of
search goals, narrow down search space and rationalize search procedures. What this perspective
omits, is that between the 1950ies and -70ies, at the same time as these early search machines

16

were invented, a variety of s/s procedures were tried out with the goal to overcome the
narrowing of s/s procedures through search machines.
Let me thus look at the invention and rise of some s/s procedures at that time. The discussion of
the following examples serves to prove the usefulness and the descriptive power of a general
theory of searching and to correct the narrow assumption of a general technisation of search
procedures. These are only brief examples to show the range of the theory and cannot replace
more detailed empirical studies. The examples also show that a variety of practices in seemingly
unconnected fields can be shown to relate to similar developments based in a cultural history of
s/s procedures. The examples I discuss represent a variety of social fields and different kinds of
s/s procedures: aleatoric art as represented by John Cage’s compositions, group decision making
with the I-Ching, the philosophy of science of Paul Feyerabend and key parties and speed dating.
The term “indeterminacy” is a key to understand these examples (Savage 1989).
The indeterminist reaction against search machines is a reaction to the perceived teleology of
existing s/s procedures. From the viewpoint of indeterminist s/s regimes, the existing s/s
procedures became more and more restricted, by narrowing search types down to navigational and
thus proscriptive searches, by relying on paths and calls for s/s procedures, and by increasingly tagging
search space. This resulted in a higher precision of search procedures at the expense of defining
the world in ever more depth. The proponents of indeterminist search procedures however can
be described as trying to find ways to un-define the world and thus to create surprises. They
attempted to turn searches into productive and thus descriptive rather than proscriptive searches.
However, contrary to expectations, in many ways this was not an anti-technological stance in the
sense that they wanted to search without they aid of objects. Rather, they tried to invent objects
and procedures that render searching more indeterminate.

17

Aleatoric Compositions 
After a first period in classical modernism (Gertrude Stein, André Breton, Kurt Schwitters),
aleatorics became widespread in the arts since the 1950ies, for example in the compositional
techniques of John Cage, various Fluxus artists who followed him, in the cut-up poetry of
William Burroughs and others, and in the works of the Oulipo group around Raymond
Quesneau. Let me discuss John Cage as one representative example:
John Cage became famous in the early 1950ies when he started to use randomisation tools,
mostly the Chinese I-Ching, to select the notes. Therewith he departed from the notion of a
composer as an inspired person that would compose by selecting notes according to some
composition theory or some stylistic rules. John Cage used the I-Ching for the first time in 1951
for the composition “Music for Changes” (Savage 1989: 113-128; Schulze 2000: 153-178; Cage
2007). The I-Ching consists of 64 sets of six lines. The lines contradict each other so that each
new throw of the lines results in new predictions. As applied to composition, the I-Ching worked
as a randomisation instrument. Cage threw the I-Ching and then selected notes according to the
results. Further than just defining the notes with the I-Ching, Cage also left all the other usual
determinants in compositions, such as duration, speed, loudness and mood at the whim of the
performer. The result was unlike anything that has ever been composed, exactly because it was
not a composition in the traditional sense, but the result of a randomisation instrument. Savage
sums the technique up as: "The emergence of indeterminate processes per se is fundamental to
Cage's programme; in the transition away from the use of indeterminate techniques as a means of
overturning such [rational structural] schemata, his methods seem to progress beyond the original
opposition (Savage 1989: 129).”
In the language of s/s previous compositional techniques mostly relied on path as a search
procedure and authoritarian selection procedures. A composer would select notes based on
historical rules of composition and a sequential logic of ordering the notes. John Cage shifted
18

“composition” into a realm where the notes were searched (and even selected) with immediate
procedures from a narrowly defined search space. Furthermore, some of the selection procedures
were even moved away from the composer to the performer, who needed to decide on them in
an authoritative way.7 Both steps not only radically redefined how “music” can sound, they also
completely redefined who “composed” the music. Cage shifted it first into the hands of a
randomisation instrument and second, equally unusual in classical music, into the hands of the
performer. Only by shifting the power away from the composer, indeterminacy could guarantee
“compositions” as unexpected as they could be.

Decision Making with the I‐Ching 
If the arts seem to be a minor field of society, the very same techniques were used in a field much
closer to the heart of sociology, namely organizational decision-making. As Boltanski and
Chiapello have observed, in the 1970ies a new, artistic critique of capitalism emerged (Boltanski
2005). Other than the previous critique of capitalism that challenged capitalism on grounds of
inequality, the artistic critique of capitalism posited that capitalism suppressed creativity and
spontaneity. As Boltanski and Chiapello observe, this critique was absorbed by capitalism itself,
by championing networks and creative ideas over hierarchy in management discourses. The
artistic model not only reflects a shift away from hierarchical styles of management to networks,
but also represents a shift in techniques for searching and selecting decisions. This shift can be
traced again with the I-Ching. The I-Ching was employed in the 1960ies as a decision making
tool by small groups of freaks, only to then become a staple of business literature two decades
later.
As Fred Turner points out in “From Counterculture to Cyberculture” (Turner 2006), a direct line
links the 1960s west-coast counterculture through the network of Stewart Brands “Whole Earth
Catalog” to the liberal ideology of the cyberculture-scene of the 1990ies. One key figure in that
group was Ken Kesey, the author of “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest”, who founded in 1964
19

a loose counter-cultural group called “the merry pranksters”. As Turner details, one of the
innovations of the pranksters consisted in trying to find ways of dealing with the problem of
authority in groups. They tried to move away from what they considered “excessive party politics
practised by the American government” and make group decisions less dependent on strong
individuals (Turner 2006: 65). Rather than turning to voting, the group turned to objects to
produce indeterminist decisions.
“One of the devices was a simple spinner. The Pranksters regularly played a game in which a
number of them would sit in a circle. Someone would spin the spinner, and whoever it pointed to
would then have full power over the group for the next thirty minutes. Another tool they used
was the I-Ching. When important decisions loomed, Kesey and others–like hippies everywhere in
the coming years–would throw a set of coins, find a correlated bit of text in the book, and use it
as the basis for taking action. The spinner and the I-Ching did serve to take power out of the
hands of designated leaders. If the former turned group members into followers, it did so only
temporarily, and only with the members' consent. “ (Turner 2006: 65).
The I-Ching became thus a tool to search for new forms of decision-making. Again, as in
aleatoric composition, previous ways of s/s were considered to be inadequate, leading to the
same predictable results. Ironically, these previous forms of s/s were the established democratic
forms. As Turner observes, the use of the I-Ching served to “reassign [power] to devices” and in
fact masked the “the very real and centralized leadership Kesey was exerting” (Turner 2006: 65).
But the story does not end here. Already in the “Last Whole Earth Catalogue”, the I-Ching, as
coda and last entry in the book, was celebrated as the generalized tool “that profoundly served the
generation that emitted the original whole earth catalog”: “Everyone from then has I Ching
stories” (Brand 1980: 593). This was but a first step of a tool that was invented as a means to
distribute power in small groups of freaks to become two decades later, along with a general
surge in interest in Eastern forms of spirituality, a tool for decision-making in business. Books
20

such as Michael Colmers “Executive I Ching : The Business Oracle” from 1987 (Colmer 1987) or
Cleary and Cheng’s “I Ching, the Tao of Organization” (Cheng 1988) or more recently William
Sadlers “The I Ching of Management : An Age Old Study for New Age Managers” (Sadler 1996)
all use the I-Ching for business decision advice.
For a theory of s/s, their central feature is that they render decision making indeterminate and
thus allow to react to quickly changing, unpredictable environments, problems that could not be
solved by the classical techniques of business knowledge, such as rational decision making. The
shift from Kesey to the business literature obviously changed the object at stake: The merry
pranksters tried to take away decisions from specific decision-makers, while the business advice
authors tried to improve the decisions by managers, without redistributing power. The search
body did not change, but what the I-Ching accomplished was to change searching for decisions
by adding an element of chance, that was not available with previous decision-making techniques.

Philosophy of Science as Description 
A third indeterminist search strategy is the philosophy of science developed by Paul Feyerabend
in his book “Against Method” (Feyerabend 1975). Originally devised as a controversy between
Feyerabend and his friend Imre Lakatos (Lakatos 1999),“Against Method” appeared as a
monograph after Lakatos’ unexpected death in 1974. The debate between Lakatos and
Feyerabend was a crucial moment in the history of philosophy of science and one of the births of
the new sociology and history of science.8 The central thesis of Feyerabend was an attack on
Lakatos and other Popperians’ attempt to write a proscriptive philosophy of science. Lakatos held
that philosophy of science should posit criteria of rationality as arbiters for which research
programmes should be pursued. Lakatos, as many other philosophers of science, firmly believed
that philosophy of science can create standards or rules of method by which to judge science. In
my terminology, Lakatos held that science is a type of navigational search and this implies, a
prescriptive kind of search, where, given the correct, rational search procedures, the truth about the
21

world would eventually be found. Since science is navigational and prescriptive, the rationality of
search procedures could be judged – by philosophers – before research is undertaken.
Feyerabend’s contribution to this debate consisted in a sceptical deconstruction of the
proscriptive claims of philosophy of science. He wondered whether in history scientists had ever
followed the rational rules of methods that the philosophers of science claimed as the hallmarks
of science. He came to the conclusion that scientists actually operated mostly by trial and error,
that many important inventions were based on luck and accidents and that the rules of method
were only applied afterwards to celebrate the scientists achievements.
Read from a s/s perspective his contribution consisted in a radical step to deny that science is
navigational and thus to deny any proscriptive possibilities of the philosophy of science. He insisted
that the s/s procedures of science can only be described after the fact. Science, in his view, is a
form of productive search and can thus only be described after the fact. “Anything goes”, the famous
slogan of his book, then was not so much another, although “anarchistic” proscription, but the
admission that science is based on path search procedures and authoritarian selection procedures
that are developed on the spot by scientists themselves without following whatever proscriptive
theories philosophy of science might hold. Other than the inventions based on the I-Ching, the
goal for Feyerabend did not consist of inventing a new method based on chance for science. For
Feyerabend, science empirically already operated along chance procedures. What he was after,
was freeing the sciences from the rationalizing descriptions other philosophers had invented.
With the computerization of research the question whether science operates on prescriptive rules
has resurfaced. The philosopher Peter Slezak started a debate about whether computers based on
artificial intelligence are able to make scientific discoveries (Slezak 1989). For Slezak, discoveries
by computers would refute the strong programme and the historicist post-Feyerabend consensus
of contemporary Science and Technology Studies. If computer programmes can discover natural
laws upon running an algorithm on a dataset, then either science would not be descriptive but
22

proscriptive – or computers would be able to mimic social behaviour that is only descriptive, not
proscriptive. For the defenders of a sociology of science the former would destroy the claims of
STS and the latter would destroy “any idea of a social science which takes social collectivities as
the primary unit of analysis (Collins 1989: 617).” While Feyerabend openend up a new form of
description for the search operations of science, Slezak raises the question, to which search body
these descriptions apply.

Key Parties and Speed Dating 
While the history and anthropology of partner search would require a whole separate book to be
written as a central locus of changing s/s procedures, I would like to close with pointing out that
recent inventions for searching a partner again are based on indeterminacy. Partner search is
different from the other search procedures described so far, because it is symmetrical. Partner
search consists of two s/s bodies that have to agree in their s/s procedures to be successful. This
is why partner search has historically produced such an amazing variety of complex s/s
technologies.
Partner search is usually based on a conceptual and most often territorial search space. In various
cultures, the institution of matchmakers has helped to expand search space, and introduced an
element of tagging (“I am looking for a handsome and wealthy man from a good Indian family
for my daughter”). Classifieds in newspapers, marriage bureaux and later classifieds in the
Internet have expanded search space further and resulted in further tagging (for an overview see:
Mullan 1984). The effect of classifieds however is a highly generic description of persons
(Coupland 1996; Hardey 2004). While classifieds extend the search space in territorial terms, they
narrow it down in conceptual terms. Tagging means that only those persons, who have given,
describable features are ever met. This has the disadvantage that central features of a person are
difficult to tag and are only accessible through face-to-face interaction. Classifieds are perfect
early search machines in Gugerli’s terms. They are both logically and conceptually a mixture of
23

“Wer bin ich?”, namely a self-categorization according to a small set of descriptive variables (age,
size, ethnicity, hobbies, profession) and dragnet search, namely a database-backed selection
according to these tags.
But again, a variety of s/s inventions has since attempted to both restrict search space, while at
the same time adding an indeterminist element to increase “success”. First, partner search itself
was reconfigured as the indeterminist practice per se (though along historical precursors that
stressed the unpredictability and transcendence of sex, such as for example Arthur Schnitzler’s
“Reigen”/”La Ronde”). Charles Jencks in his important book “Ad-hocism” pointed to “ad hoc
games” with “exploratory purposes” among which he prominently mentioned “the get-together
dance” and the “computer dating system” (Jencks 1973: 193) and he called “sex [as] the mode of
social adhocism” (Jencks 1973: 197).
More specifically, in the 1970ies, key parties were held as a form of exchanging sex partners (Bell
1971: 74). As shown in a famous scene of the Ang Lee movie “the Ice Storm”, in a key party, the
males of arriving couples would place their car keys into a bowl on arrival. At the end of the
evening, the females would randomly select a car key from the bowl and leave (and potentially
have sex) with the owner of the key. Key parties operate on three levels: they first radically
restrict the search space to those who agree on specific sex practices. Second, by having the
males place the car keys into a bowl, the heterosexual symmetry is achieved. Only these two steps
that guarantee symmetry allow to introduce indeterminacy: Taking out keys from the bowl
assigns randomly who leaves with whom.
Speed dating, a recent invention, introduces indeterminacy for different effects: Rabbi Yaacov
Deyo invented it in 1998 (Porter Brown 2003; SpeedDating 2010b). The idea behind speed
dating was to allow (Jewish) individuals who are looking for a partner to meet many others in the
same situation. Speed Dating is based on seven short meetings with seven different individuals
each seven minutes long in one room. After each meeting, the participants write down on a note
24

if they are interested to meet the person again. The organisers of the speed-dating event then
check for matches and hand out contact addresses for those where both signalled further interest.
Speed dating is the indeterminist answer to the widening of search space cum tagging. It narrows
down the territorial search space, but opens up the conceptual search space and combines it with the
central resource for dating, namely face-to-face meetings. Similarly to I-Ching, it introduces a
very simple device, namely a room with tables and a subscription service to solve the problem
generated by tagging. Speed Dating gains its attraction from the fact that the other in dating is
randomly selected from a defined search space (a given area) and one tag (being Jewish, in the
original version). It selects only two search criteria, a territorial and a religious one, which are
central for the participants, but it denies any further tagging. The “rules & recommendations” of
Speed dating even mentions that participants should not talk about each other’s profession, and
instead recommends: “Have a fresh conversation. How about your favourite book or movie?
Where you last went on vacation or how your life would change if you won the lottery”
(SpeedDating 2010a). The rules thus explicitly encourage the participants to use speed dating to
explore non-taggable parts of their life, by assuming that love or a partnership does not so much
depend on them. A more recent and more radical form are the random interactions with videochat called ‘Chatroulette’ (Chatroulette 2010). Again, the goal of Chatroulette is to widen the
interaction space ad infinitum, by randomly selecting a person to chat with, except that here, the
internet itself operates as indeterminist search machine.

Indeterminist Searches 
These four small vignettes point out a larger phenomenon: while search machinisation has clearly
been an important cultural trend of the last forty years or so, with the world becoming more and
more a tagged space in which search machines of all kinds operate, we can also observe a parallel,
indeterminist trend: in science and the arts, but also in organizational decision making and
partner search, proscriptive search machines based on tagging appear too restrictive. Aleatoric
25

Music, the I-Ching in business, Feyerabend’s philosophy of science and speed dating each in its
own way are important inventions to widen search practices with other means than search
machines. For the moment, they represent a first step at a more general picture of a history of s/s
procedures.
The search space in many of these tools is now more restricted than before: In the model of the
artistic genius, the search space was principally infinite. A painter can paint any form, and a
composer can compose any sound. But in reality it was restricted through traditions and
embodied routines. The tools to create the new forms, the I-Ching (Cage and decision making)
or a room with chairs and rules for a game (speed-dating) restricted search space to a given
number of notes or duration of tones or a number of participants on a speed dating evening. But
doing so allowed to widen the search goals: Instead of falling back into the always same routines,
new, never before existing experiences, decisions and sounds were created.
The changes implied not only a shift from an infinite search space defined by artistic genius to a
restricted search space defined by tools. It also came with a change in the role of the search
subject. Whereas the artist in the previous model was considered to follow his own thoughts, his
inner feelings or a tradition, the new indeterminist model deleted all these emotions and the role
of the artist’s body and replaced it with a tool. While the role of the scientist in the earlier
philosophy of science made him into a tool for objectivity, a machine that executed the rules of
science, already knowing what he was looking for, with Feyerabend, the scientist became an
anarchist, freed from any rules. While the role of the organizational leader in rational decisionmaking was restricted by Fordist rules of rationalizing the factory, the I-Ching shifted her role
towards “innovation.” The subject searching for a partner was either a passive subject, who was
handed a partner by relatives or a match-maker. Or she advertised herself using pre-defined tags
and thus turned herself and her search objects into pre-defined sets of categories. With speeddating she became a quickly reacting, interactionally savvy individual.
26

In this regard, the new indeterminist forms mirror the new computerised search of dragnet
investigation. In dragnet investigation, the skills of the individual police officers were replaced by
sifting through piles of data with the help of computers. Similarly the search space was now
clearly defined and persons were replaced by algorithms as search agents. What differentiates the
indeterminist model is that it looks like a parody of dragnet investigation. The replacement of
persons, the exclusion of emotions, the invention of new procedures to get where no one has
been before is not legitimated with more “rational” search results, but the opposite.
Indeterminate s/s procedures do not advertise themselves with that you get what you were
looking for, but that you get what you were not looking for. Indeterminate search procedures do
not derive their strength from a legitimating force such as reason or beauty, but unexpectedness.
Previous methods produced too predictive results; the new indeterminate tools produce new
ones, because they could never have been foreseen.

Conclusion: Towards a Comparative Analysis of Search Procedures 
In this article I have outlined first steps towards a history of search procedures. I started with the
observation that Google has been an object of scholarly investigation, but scholars rarely asked
what Google actually replaced. The important exception is Gugerli's generalized definition of
search machines as having a search goal, a search space and a search routine. From there I
developed a first generalized theory of search procedures by specifying different types of search
objects, search spaces, and search and selection procedures. I then used this framework to show
that technologization of search procedures, as seems to happen through Google and the
examples given by Gugerli is but one historic trend that is counteracted by what I call
indeterminate search procedures.
This is nothing but a first step and I would like to point at some further avenues opened up for
research. First, we need detailed historical studies of how and why search procedures change in
different fields or functional systems. Science and Technology Studies has, under very different
27

theoretical language done this for science over the past twenty years or so.9 But we do not have
such histories for many other fields. Second, one could study how different search procedures
travel from one field and one activity to another. I described the indeterminate search procedures
above as unrelated to each other. However, if the historical diagnosis is correct, then
indeterminate search procedures were probably learnt and taken up between these different
fields.

Bibliography 
Auletta, K. 2009 Googled: The End of the World as We Know It, New York: Penguin Press.
Baeza-Yates, R. 2011 Modern Information Retrieval: The Concepts and Technology Behind Search 2nd ed.,
Harlow: Addison Wesley.
Battelle, J. 2005 The Search. How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed
Our Culture, New York: Portfolio.
Becker, K. (ed) 2010 Deep Search: The Politics of Search Beyond Google, Piscataway N.J.: Studien
Verlag/Transaction Publishers.
Bell, R. 1971 Social Deviance. A Substantive Analysis, Homewood Ill.: Dorsey Press.
Boltanski, L. 2005 The New Spirit of Capitalism, London: Verso.
Brand, S. 1980 The Next Whole Earth Catalogue. Access to Tools, New York: Rand McNally.
Brewer, E.A. 2001 'When Everything Is Searchable', Communications of the ACM 44(3): p.53-54.
Cage, J. 2007 'Composition as Process: Indeterminacy' in C. Cox and D. Warner (eds) Audio
Culture: Readings in Modern Music, New York: Continuum.
Campbell, D.T. 1988 'A General “Selection Theory”, as Implemented in Biological Evolution
and in Social Belief-Transmission-with-Modification in Science', Biology and Philosophy 3(2): p.171–
177.
Carr, N. 2008 'Is Google Making Us Stupid?', The Atlantic 302(1): p.56–63.
28

Carson, J. 2001 'Opening the Democracy Box', Social Studies of Science 31(3): p.425–428.
Case, D. 2008 Looking for Information: A Survey of Research on Information Seeking, Needs, and Behavior
2nd ed., Bingley U.K.: Emerald.
Castells, M. 2009 The Rise of the Network Society, With a New Preface The Information Age: Economy,
Society, and Culture., New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Cavanagh, A. 2007 Sociology in the Age of the Internet, McGraw-Hill International.
Chatroulette 2010 'Chatroulette!', Available at: http://chatroulette.com/ [Accessed April 19,
2010].
Cheng, Y. 1988 I Ching, the Tao of Organization, Boston: Shambhala.
Collins, H.M. 1989 'Computers and the Sociology of Scientific Knowledge', Social Studies of
Science 19(4): p.613-624.
Colmer, M. 1987 Executive I Ching: The Business Oracle, Poole; New York: Blandford Press.
Coupland, J. 1996 'Dating Advertisements: Discourses of the Commodified Self', Discourse &
Society 7(2): p.187-206.
Deicke, D. 2009 'A New View On Old Search Engines. Review of Gugerli: Suchmaschinen.',
Society of the Query. Available at: http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/re-search/2009/06/16/anew-view-on-old-search-engines/ [Accessed July 27, 2011].
Dijk, J. 2000 The Network Society: Social Aspects of New Media, London: Sage Publications.
Feyerabend, P. 1975 Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge 2nd ed., London:
NLB.
Fleck, L. 1935 Entstehung und Entwicklung einer wissenschaftlichen Tatsache: Einfu!hrung in d. Lehre vom
Denkstil u. Denkkollektiv, Basel: Schwabe.
Fuchs, P. 1997 'Adressabilität als Grundbegriff der soziologischen Systemtheorie', Soziale Systeme
3(1): p.57-79.
Golumbia, D. 2009 The Cultural Logic of Computation, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Gugerli, D. 2009a Suchmaschinen. Die Welt als Datenbank, Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp.
29

Gugerli, D. 2009b 'The Culture of the Search Society. Data Management as Signifying Practice',
Institute of Network Cultures. Available at:
http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/query/2009/11/30/lecture-david-gugerli-the-culture-of-thesearch-society/ [Accessed July 27, 2011].
Guha, R., McCool, R. and Miller, E. 2003 'Semantic Search' in Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on World Wide Web, Budapest, Hungary: ACM. Available at:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=775250 [Accessed April 5, 2010].
Halavais, A. 2009 Search Engine Society, Cambridge: Polity.
Hardey, M. 2004 'Mediated Relationships.', Information, Communication & Society 7(2): p.207-222.
Ichbiah, D. 2007 Comment Google Mangera Le Monde. Essai, Paris: L’Archipel.
Jeanneney, J.-N. 2007 Google and the Myth of Universal Knowledge. A View from Europe 4th ed.,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jencks, C. 1973 Adhocism: The Case for Improvisation 1st ed., Garden City, New York: Anchor
Books.
Kellerman, A. 2002 The Internet on earth : a geography of information, New York: J. Wiley.
Krajewski, M. 2010 'Ask Jeeves: Servants as Search Engines', Grey Room -: p.6-19.
Lakatos, I. 1999 For and Against Method: Including Lakatos’s Lectures on Scientific Method and the
Lakatos-Feyerabend Correspondence, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lowe, J. 2009 Google Speaks. Secrets of the World’s Greatest Billionaire Entrepreneurs, Sergey Brin and
Larry Page, Hoboken, N.J: Wiley.
Mansell, R. (ed) 2009 The Information Society: Critical Concepts in Sociology, Milton Park: Routledge.
Merton, Robert K. 1936 'The Unanticipated Consequences of Purposive Social Action',
American Sociological Review 1(6): p.894-904.
Merton, Robert King 2004 The Travels and Adventures of Serendipity. A Study in Sociological Semantics
and the Sociology of Science, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mullan, B. 1984 The Mating Trade, London: Routledge.
30

Porter Brown, N. 2003 'The Road to Romance', Harvard Magazine. Available at:
http://harvardmagazine.com/2003/03/the-road-to-romance.html [Accessed April 8, 2010].
Post, D. 2009 In Search of Jefferson’s Moose: Notes on the State of Cyberspace., Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Sadler, W. 1996 The I Ching of Management: An Age Old Study for New Age Managers 1st ed., Atlanta
GA: Humanics Limited.
Savage, R.W.H. 1989 Structure and Sorcery. The Aesthetics of Post-War Serial Composition and
Indeterminacy, New York: Garland Pub.
Schulze, H. 2000 Das Aleatorische Spiel. Erkundung und Anwendung der nichtintentionalen Werkgenese im
20. Jahrhundert, München: Fink.
Scott, J. 1998 Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed,
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Slezak, P. 1989 'Scientific Discovery by Computer as Empirical Refutation of the Strong
Programme', Social Studies of Science 19(4): p.563-600.
Specter, M. 2000 'Postcard from Silicon Valley. Search and Deploy. How to Find What You
Need on the Net', The New Yorker: p.88–101.
SpeedDating 2010a 'SpeedDating FAQs', Speeddating. 7 Minute Round-Robin Dating. Available at:
http://www.speeddating.com/faqs.php [Accessed April 19, 2010].
SpeedDating 2010b 'SpeedDating History', Speeddating. 7 Minute Round-Robin Dating. Available at:
http://www.speeddating.com/history.php [Accessed April 8, 2010].
Stark, D. 2009 The Sense of Dissonance: Accounts of Worth in Economic Life, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Stichweh, R. 2000 'Adresse und Lokalisierung in einem globalen Kommunikationssystem' in R.
Stichweh (ed) Die Weltgesellschaft. Soziologische Analysen, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Stross, R.E. 2008 Planet Google. One Company’s Audacious Plan to Organize Everything We Know, New
York: Free Press.
31

Tantner, A. 2003 'Adressierungs-Fragmente. Konskriptionsnummern in Wien', Dérive 11(März).
Available at: http://www.derive.at/index.php?p_case=2&id_cont=361&issue_No=11.
Tantner, A. 2009 'Vor Google – Suchmaschinen im analogen Zeitalter', Available at:
http://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=26979 [Accessed March 2, 2010].
Tredinnick, L. 2008 Digital Information Culture: The Individual and Society in the Digital Age, Oxford
England: Chandos.
Turner, F. 2006 From Counterculture to Cyberculture. Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and the
Rise of Digital Utopianism, University of Chicago Press.
Vaidhyanathan, S. 2011 The Googlization of Everything (and Why We Should Worry, University of
California Press. Available at: http://www.googlizationofeverything.com/ [Accessed August 5,
2009].
Vise, D.A. 2005 The Google Story, London: Macmillan.
Vree, W. van 1999 Meetings, Manners, and Civilization, Leicester: Leicester University Press.
Zorn, J. 2007 'The Game Pieces' in C. Cox and D. Warner (eds) Audio Culture: Readings in Modern
Music, New York: Continuum.

1

Similarly to Gugerli’s history, a symposium in Vienna under the title “”Before Google”

discussed older search technologies for (academic) resources, texts and papers (Tantner 2009).
Also see the articles of Robert Darnton, Paul Duguid and Katja Mayer in Becker (2010).
2

An English excerpt of the book is Gugerli (2009b) and Deicke (2009) has written an insightful

review in English.
3

He adds a fourth point – closeness to game and simulation – but it is not necessary to the

definition.
4

See below the chapter on Feyerabend for an elaboration.

32

5

In the context of social systems theory, addresses and addressability have become prominent

theoretical concepts that allow to theorize how things and persons are attached to each other and
made communicable, see for example Fuchs (1997). Stichweh points out that in pre-modern
societies person names were the only addresses and these also locate a person in a social structure
– attach them to a family and put them in a social place. In modernity, a number of often
incongruent addresses, such as car numbers, telephone numbers, street numbers, social security
numbers, IP-adresses relate to persons, things and organisations and mostly do not indicate the
social place of the person (Stichweh 2000; also see Scott 1998: 64-71).
6

As far as I am aware of, there is very little empirical literature on everyday voting practices

outside of the political realm. This is astonishing given the central place voting has in political
theory. We largely do not know, when, how and why people take decisions by voting in small
groups, in families, in schools and clubs. For a rare exception see Vree (1999).
7

A few years later free improvisors abolished the function of the composer completely and s/s in

music was left to performers. However, it soon turned out that this freedom in itself resulted in a
style with its restrictions and repetitions. In the early 1980s John Zorn devised “game pieces”
such as “Archery” or “Cobra” as a search machine that would overcome the restrictions of free
improvisation without resorting to a composer (Zorn 2007). In these pieces the musicians
themselves play according to “rules” that define speed, pitch, style etc. and as in sports, a referee
controls that the rules are kept.
8

An important precursor to Feyerabend, at least seen from the viewpoint of s/s is Robert King

Merton with his concepts of “unintended consequences” (Robert K. Merton 1936) and
“serendipity” (Robert King Merton 2004). But the former concept was not developed with regard
to science and the second, although written in the 1950ies, was only published after Merton’s
death in 2004. In serendipity Merton makes the general claim that most scientific discoveries are
not planned, but happen accidentally (2004 chapter 9). Serendipity is an intellectual history and
sociology of one specific anti-technological search procedure.
9

Campbell has already developed a theory of science based on a theoretical vocabulary of

selection (and searching) (Campbell 1988).

33

