Theory,http://tcs.sagepub.com/
Culture & Society

In the Social Factory?: Immaterial Labour, Precariousness and Cultural Work
Rosalind Gill and Andy Pratt
Theory Culture Society 2008 25: 1
DOI: 10.1177/0263276408097794
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://tcs.sagepub.com/content/25/7-8/1

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:
Theory, Culture and Society

Additional services and information for Theory, Culture & Society can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://tcs.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://tcs.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations: http://tcs.sagepub.com/content/25/7-8/1.refs.html

>> Version of Record - Jan 8, 2009
What is This?

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 1

Precarity and Cultural Work

In the Social Factory?
Immaterial Labour, Precariousness and
Cultural Work

Rosalind Gill and Andy Pratt

Abstract
This article introduces a special section concerned with precariousness and
cultural work. Its aim is to bring into dialogue three bodies of ideas – the
work of the autonomous Marxist ‘Italian laboratory’; activist writings about
precariousness and precarity; and the emerging empirical scholarship
concerned with the distinctive features of cultural work, at a moment when
artists, designers and (new) media workers have taken centre stage as a
supposed ‘creative class’ of model entrepreneurs. The article is divided into
three sections. It starts by introducing the ideas of the autonomous Marxist
tradition, highlighting arguments about the autonomy of labour, informational capitalism and the ‘factory without walls’, as well as key concepts such
as multitude and immaterial labour. The impact of these ideas and of
Operaismo politics more generally on the precarity movement is then
considered in the second section, discussing some of the issues that have
animated debate both within and outside this movement, which has often
treated cultural workers as exemplifying the experiences of a new
‘precariat’. In the third and final section we turn to the empirical literature
about cultural work, pointing to its main features before bringing it into
debate with the ideas already discussed. Several points of overlap and
critique are elaborated – focusing in particular on issues of affect, temporality, subjectivity and solidarity.
Key words
affect ■ autonomous Marxism ■ creative industries
immaterial labour ■ precariousness

■

■

cultural work

■

Theory, Culture & Society 2008 (SAGE, Los Angeles, London, New Delhi, and Singapore),
Vol. 25(7–8): 1–30
DOI: 10.1177/0263276408097794

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

2

3/12/08

14:07

Page 2

Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

T

RANSFORMATIONS IN advanced capitalism under the impact of
globalization, information and communication technologies, and
changing modes of political and economic governance have produced
an apparently novel situation in which increasing numbers of workers in
affluent societies are engaged in insecure, casualized or irregular labour.
While capitalist labour has always been characterized by intermittency for
lower-paid and lower-skilled workers, the recent departure is the addition
of well-paid and high-status workers into this group of ‘precarious workers’.
The last decades have seen a variety of attempts to make sense of the broad
changes in contemporary capitalism that have given rise to this – through
discussions of shifts relating to post-Fordism, post-industrialization,
network society, liquid modernity, information society, ‘new economy’, ‘new
capitalism’ and risk society (see Bauman, 2000, 2005; Beck, 2000; Beck
and Ritter, 1992; Beck et al., 2000; Bell, 1973; Boltanski and Chiapello,
2005; Castells, 1996; Lash and Urry, 1993; Reich, 2000; Sennett, 1998,
2006; Theory, Culture & Society has also been an important forum for these
debates). While work has been central to all these accounts, the relationship between the transformations within working life and workers’ subjectivities has been relatively under-explored. However, in the last few years
a number of terms have been developed that appear to speak directly to this.
Notions include creative labour, network labour, cognitive labour, affective
labour and immaterial labour. While such terms are not reducible to each
other (Neilson and Rossiter, 2005), their very proliferation points to the
significance of contemporary transformations and signals – at the very least
– that ‘something’ is going on.
In this special section we will address that ‘something’ through a
sustained focus on one group of workers said perhaps more than any other
to symbolize contemporary transformations of work: cultural and creative
workers. In this context it is important to be clear about the object of our
analysis. The cultural and creative industries are part of what is commonly
referred to as the service and knowledge economy. Writers who stress the
role of creativity (as a source of competitive advantage) point to the injection of ‘creative’ work into all areas of economic life. By contrast, scholars
who are interested in the cultural industries point to the growth of the
particular industries that produce cultural outputs. These industries have
undergone significant expansion in recent years (Pratt, 2007). The two terms
– cultural industries and creative industries – are subject to considerable
dispute (Hesmondhalgh, 2002, 2007; Lovink and Rossiter, 2007; Peck,
2005; Pratt, 2005, 2008). We regard the term ‘creative industries’ simply as
a political rebranding of the cultural industries following Miege (1989),
Garnham (1987) and Hesmondhalgh and Pratt (2005).
Artists, (new) media workers and other cultural labourers are hailed
as ‘model entrepreneurs’ by industry and government figures (Florida, 2002;
Reich, 2000); they are also conjured in more critical discourses as exemplars of the move away from stable notions of ‘career’ to more informal,
insecure and discontinuous employment (Jones, 1996), are said to be iconic
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 3

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 3

representatives of the ‘brave new world of work’ (Beck, 2000; Flores and
Gray, 2000), in which risks and responsibilities must be borne solely by the
individual (Allen and Henry, 1997; Batt et al., 1999; Gill, 2007; Jarvis and
Pratt, 2006; McRobbie, 1999, 2002; Neff et al., 2005), and, more recently,
as we elaborate in this article, they have been identified as the poster boys
and girls of the new ‘precariat’ – a neologism that brings together the
meanings of precariousness and proletariat to signify both an experience of
exploitation and a (potential) new political subjectivity.
While there has been discussion of the emergence of ‘free agents’
(Pink, 2001) and of the tensions of the work–life balance (Hyman et al.,
2003; McDowell, 2004; Perrons, 2003; Webster, 2004), precariousness,
precarity and precarization have recently emerged as novel territory for
thinking – and intervening in – labour and life. They come at once from the
powerful body of work associated with autonomist Marxist intellectuals in
Italy and France, and – importantly – from post-operaist political activism,
such as that seen in the EuroMayDay mobilizations in the first few years of
the 21st century. Precariousness (in relation to work) refers to all forms of
insecure, contingent, flexible work – from illegalized, casualized and
temporary employment, to homeworking, piecework and freelancing. In
turn, precarity signifies both the multiplication of precarious, unstable,
insecure forms of living and, simultaneously, new forms of political struggle
and solidarity that reach beyond the traditional models of the political party
or trade union. This double meaning is central to understanding the ideas
and politics associated with precarity; the new moment of capitalism that
engenders precariousness is seen as not only oppressive but also as offering
the potential for new subjectivities, new socialities and new kinds of politics.
The aim of this special section is to bring together three bodies of ideas
– the work of the ‘Italian laboratory’, including Antonio Negri, Michael
Hardt, Paolo Virno, Franco Beradi and Maurizio Lazzarato; the activist
writings about precarity that have appeared in online journal sites such as
Fibreculture and Mute; and the emerging research on creative labour being
produced by sociologists and others (Adkins, 1999; Banks, 2007; Batt et
al., 1999; Beck, 2003; Blair, 2003; Blair et al., 2003; Deuze, 2007; Gill,
2002, 2007; Gottschall and Kroos, 2007; Jeffcutt and Pratt, 2002; Markusen
and Schrock, 2006; McRobbie, 1998, 1999, 2003; Mayerhofer and Mokre,
2007; Neff et al., 2005; Perrons, 1999, 2002, 2003; Pratt, 2002; Pratt et al.,
2007; Ross, 2003; Taylor and Littleton, 2008a, 2008b; Ursell, 2000;). It is
striking how little connection, until now, there has been between the theory
and activism influenced by autonomous Marxists and empirical research
(though see de Peuter and Dyer-Witheford, 2006; Ehrenstein, 2006), and it
is this that the articles collected here seek to develop, beginning a conversation between the different traditions. Each of these strands constitutes, in
a sense, an emergent field that is in process and not yet stabilized (in the
manner understood by sociologists of scientific knowledge). The objective
here is not to ‘apply’ one ‘perspective’ to another, but rather to bring these
ideas into a dialogue in which sometimes difficult and challenging ‘high’
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

4

3/12/08

14:07

Page 4

Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

theory, activist politics and empirical research can raise new questions of
each other. In what follows we discuss the writings of the autonomist school
together with activist writings, in recognition of them as always-already
entangled with political movements, and respecting their desire to move
beyond a sociological perspective to a more political engagement with the
dynamics of power in post-Fordist societies (Hardt and Negri, 2000, 2004;
Negri, 1979, 1989; Virno et al., 2004).
The special section features five articles (including this one) which
situate themselves in different ways in relation to these debates. After this
article, the section opens with an essay by Andrew Ross entitled ‘The New
Geography of Work: Power to the Precarious?’, in which he argues that the
precariousness of work in the creative economy reflects the uptake and
infiltration of models of employment from the low-wage sectors. He asks
whether precariousness in and beyond the creative industries can become
a source of solidarity and ‘common cause’ among different groups. In the
second article Susan Christopherson offers direct evidence of precarious
work in the film industry. Historically, the film industry has been an early
adopter of flexible and freelance work. Christopherson highlights the recent
consequences: the weakening of union representation and control, and the
way that, far from opening up access, the social networking and social
recruitment that precarious work relies upon has markedly intensified
divisions on the basis of gender and ethnicity. Next, Brett Neilson and Ned
Rossiter argue that precariousness is the norm in capitalism and that
Fordism was in fact the aberration or exception. Interrogating precarity as
a political concept, they argue that its potential to produce novel forms of
connection, subjectivity and political organization is itself a precarious
project of border crossing and translation. Finally Hesmondhalgh and Baker
take on the usefulness of autonomist ideas for engaging with the area of television production they are researching. They are critical of the autonomist
notions of immaterial and affective labour, and use their empirical analysis
to ‘talk back’ to this body of ideas. Intellectually and politically the articles
take contrasting positions, yet are united by the attempts to think – and
intervene in – precariousness as a defining feature of cultural labour, and,
some might argue, contemporary life. In the remaining space of this article,
however, the aim is to set out the context for this special section, with a
discussion of precariousness, precarity and creative or cultural work.
This article is divided into three parts. In the first we introduce the
notions of precariousness, precarity and precarization in the context of
contemporary autonomist Marxist writing. A number of key terms or themes
will be examined – e.g. notions of immaterial labour, the social factory and
multitude. In the second the politics of the precarity movement is discussed.
In the final part of the article we turn to the growing body of empirical
research on creative labour, and highlight several key themes of this work
which overlap and resonate with autonomist thinking. These are themes
relating to the importance of affect, temporality, subjectivity and solidarity.
We raise questions and present the following articles in the spirit of
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 5

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 5

beginning a dialogue, some themes of which include: how might the autonomist preoccupation with temporality speak to the experiences of timepressured cultural workers? Does the autonomist emphasis upon the
affective dimensions of work contribute to an understanding of creative
labour? How might empirical studies of the experience of cultural work
speak to autonomist arguments about emergent subjectivities in these
fields? What kinds of political organization and resistance are likely to
emerge in these profoundly individualized fields, and might precarity offer
a point of articulation and solidarity? A short conclusion then draws this
introductory article to a close.
Autonomist Marxism and the Multitude
The account of capitalism proposed by autonomist Marxists (see for example
Hardt, 2005; Hardt and Negri, 2000, 2004; Lazzarato, 1996, 2007; Murphy
and Mustapha, 2005b; Virno et al., 2004; Virno and Hardt, 1996) differs in
several key respects from classical Marxism. It rejects the notion of history
as a linear progression through a series of different stages, leading to the
final and inevitable collapse of capitalism, brought about by declining rates
of profit. In place of an account of the power of capital, it stresses the
autonomy and creativity of labour, and workers’ power to bring about
change. From this perspective, capital never shifts of its own accord;
workers’ movements are the stimulus of development. Rather than seeing
wage labourers as (merely) victims of capital, autonomists highlight their
role as protagonists, in a view of capitalism in which a dialectical logic gives
way to a revitalized emphasis on the antagonism of capitalist relations
(though not understood in simple binary terms).
Work or labour has been a pre-eminent focus of autonomist writing
and activism, and is understood as representing the central mechanism of
capitalism. Autonomist theorist Harry Cleaver defines capitalism as ‘a social
system based on the imposition of work with the commodity form’ (2000:
82), a system in which life is arranged around, and subordinated to, work
and becomes the grounds of its mode of domination (Weeks, 2005). Given
this understanding, autonomist Marxists do not call for more work, for the
right to work or even for less alienated work, but point to the refusal of work
as a political – potentially revolutionary – act. This is because, as Negri
argues, to refuse work is fundamentally to challenge capitalism: ‘the refusal
of work does not negate one nexus of capitalist society, one aspect of capital’s
process of production or reproduction. Rather, with all its radicality, it
negates the whole of capitalist society’ (Negri, 1979: 124).
Autonomist writers are critical of some Marxists for their failure to
appreciate the significance of work as constitutive of social life, and for
their tendency to romanticize labour. Negri notes that it is sometimes treated
as if it were ‘a title of nobility’ rather than the central mechanism of
capitalist domination. He indicts other socialists for their commitment to
‘productivism’, seeing it both as a retreat from critical analysis and from
utopian imagination. For Negri, the refusal of work is both ‘a demand and
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

6

3/12/08

14:07

Page 6

Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

a perspective’ (Weeks, 2005: 109ff.). Refusal was a central tenet of
Operaismo, the Italian workerist movements of the 1970s, alongside the
‘leading role thesis’ and the ‘strongest link strategy’, which held that the
critique of capital should start from working-class struggles and that energy
be focused on the strongest parts of proletarian movements (rather than the
weakest links of capital). As a practice, such a challenge may include
slacking, absenteeism, wildcat strikes and acts of refusal or sabotage within
the workplace, and it articulates an alternative to productivist values in an
affirmation of what Kathi Weeks calls ‘hedonist Marxism’: ‘our propensity
to want more – more time, freedom, and pleasure’, and a ‘vision of life no
longer organised primarily around work’ (Weeks, 2005: 133). This captures
autonomists’ emphasis on the positive, constructive aspects of refusal, and
on a kind of politics which is not only designed to change the future, but
also, in its very practice, to bring into existence new ways of being, living
and relating. In this sense it echoes the ideas of the situationists (Debord,
1994; Vaneigem, 1972). This is Negri’s idea of communism as a ‘constituting praxis’. As Hardt and Negri put it in Empire: ‘the refusal of work and
authority, or really the refusal of voluntary servitude, is the beginning of a
liberatory politics. . . . Beyond the simple refusal, or as part of that refusal,
we need also to construct a new mode of life and above all a new community’
(2000: 204). Other autonomists characterize this as ‘exit’ or ‘exodus’ – again
highlighting less the negative aspects of such terms but rather the capacity
to ‘reinvent’ the rules of the game and ‘disorient the enemy’ (Virno, 1996).
The dynamism of autonomist accounts of capitalism is striking. As
Dyer-Witheford (2005) vividly argues, it is ‘a story of escalating cut and
thrust, a spiral attack and counter-attack’:
Capital attempts to expropriate the inventive, cooperative capacity of workers,
on which it depends for production of commodities. But labour resists. The
spectre of subversion drives capital on a relentless ‘flight to the future’,
expanding its territorial space and technological intensity in an attempt to
destroy or circumvent an antagonist from whose value-creating power it can
never, however, separate without destroying itself. (2005: 137)

From this perspective, the working class is ‘not just made, but incessantly
remade, as its contestation brings on successive rounds of capitalist reorganisation’ (Dyer-Witheford, 2005, our emphasis), which in turn generate
new strategies and tactics of struggle. Hardt and Negri argue that, in the
most recent phase of these ongoing cycles of attack and counter-attack, the
industrial militancy of the European and North American working class
brought forth a devastating ‘reply’ from capital, in which all the forces of
state repression, transnationalization and technological development were
deployed to decimate organized labour. The era of Fordist, industrial
production was all but destroyed and the mass worker was replaced by the
‘socialized worker’, bringing into being a new epoch in which the factory is
increasingly disseminated out into society as a whole. Tronti (1966) writes
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 7

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 7

of the ‘social factory’ and Negri of ‘firms without factories’ or the ‘factory
without walls’. From this perspective labour is deterritorialized, dispersed
and decentralized so that ‘the whole society is placed at the disposal of
profit’ (Negri, 1989: 79). It is further argued that the state, in turn, has
shifted from a planner-state based on Keynesian economic principles to a
‘crisis state’ or ‘neoliberal’ state which, as Michael Hardt (2005: 10) argues,
‘does not mean a reduction in economic and social interventionism, but, on
the contrary, a broadening of social labour power and an intensification of
the state’s control over the social factory’. This is both more intense and
more globally dispersed, as centralized programmes of imperialist
expansion give way to ‘a decentred, transnational regime of production and
governance’ (Murphy and Mustapha, 2005a: 1).
It is not difficult to discern similarities between autonomist accounts
of contemporary capitalism and analyses of post-Fordism (Piore and Sabel,
1984), and in particular the work of the Regulation School (Aglietta, 1979;
Lipietz, 1992). Moreover, the periodization adopted by many autonomist
intellectuals resonates with several other perspectives in identifying the mid
1970s as a key moment (Harvey, 1988; Jameson, 1991), the site of a
temporal shift in capitalist organization. What distinguishes autonomist
ideas from these other accounts are two linked themes: first the optimism
of this perspective, most notably the resistance to seeing the shift as a
terminal blow to the working class, and second the focus on subjectivity. As
long ago as the early 1970s Negri posed the question: ‘What is the working
class today, in this specific crisis, no longer merely as objects of exploitation, but the subject of power?’ (1973: 105, emphasis added). In more recent
writing Hardt and Negri (2000, 2004) focus on the potentialities and
capacities of the new post-Fordist proletariat, revisioned to fit their conceptualization of the dispersed social factory, as multitude, operators and
agents. The notion of multitude, in particular, emerges as a key term for
thinking class composition for this new (dispersed, fragmented, individualized) moment, in a way that maintains a stress upon collective forms of
subjectivity and politics: ‘Multitude is meant to recognize what the class
formation is today and, in describing that class formation, to recognize forms
of its possibilities of acting politically’ (Hardt, 2005: 96).
Informational Capitalism and Immaterial Labour
Perhaps the autonomist term which, more than any other, may be expected
to make a significant contribution to understanding the nature and
conditions of creative work is that of ‘immaterial labour’, ‘where labour
produces immaterial goods such as a service, a cultural product, knowledge
or communication’ (Hardt and Negri, 2000: 292). Lazzarato (1996: 133)
argues that the concept refers to two different aspects of labour:
On the one hand, as regards the ‘informational content’ of the commodity, it
refers directly to the changes taking place in workers’ labour processes in big
companies in the industrial and tertiary sectors, where the skills involved in

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

8

3/12/08

14:07

Page 8

Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)
direct labour are increasingly skills involving cybernetics and computer
control (and horizontal and vertical communication). On the other hand, as
regards the activity that produces the ‘cultural content’ of the commodity,
immaterial labour involves a series of activities that are not normally recognized as ‘work’ – in other words, the kinds of activities involved in defining
and fixing cultural and artistic standards, fashions, tastes, consumer norms
and, more strategically, public opinion. Once the privileged domain of the
bourgeoisie and its children, these activities have since the end of the 1970s
become the domain of what we have come to define as ‘mass intellectuality’.

Autonomist writers stress dual processes – on the one hand the ‘reTaylorisation’ (Galetto et al., 2007) or ‘proletarianisation’ (Del Re, 2005) of
cultural and intellectual work, and on the other the transformation of all work
such that it is increasingly dependent on communicative and emotional
capacities. As Cristina Morini (2007: 40) puts it: ‘cognitive capitalism tends
to prioritize extracting value from relational and emotional elements’. The
notion of affective labour has achieved greater prominence in recent years as
autonomous Marxists emphasize the significance to capitalism of the production and manipulation of affect. This is related to a shift in capitalism understood by Hardt and Negri (2000: 291) as ‘informationalization’ – the notion
that lives are increasingly dominated by technologies: ‘Today we increasingly
think like computers, while communication technologies and their model of
interaction are becoming more and more central to labouring activities.’ This
is leading, they argue, to a ‘homogenization of labouring processes’ (Hardt
and Negri, 2000: 290). However, neither Lazzarato nor Hardt and Negri
conceive of immaterial labour as purely functional to capitalism, but also see
it as providing potential for a kind of spontaneous, elementary communism.
Their writing emphasizes its double face – on the one side the shifts and
intensification of exploitation brought about by the acceleration of information, and by Empire’s search for ways of realizing ‘unmediated command
over subjectivity itself’ (Lazzarato, 1996: 134), but on the other the release
of a social potential for transformation, largely attributable to its affective
dimensions and the opportunities for human contact and interaction. This
has some echoes of Marx’s ideas about the contradictory nature of capitalism. For autonomists, too, capitalism’s potential destruction is immanent to
it. Indeed, nothing is outside – ‘there is only trade or war’, as the political
slogan has it (quoted by Foti in Oudenampsen and Sullivan, 2004). However,
Hardt and Negri say more than this. For them, workers’ use of technology
exceeds the capacity of capital to control it (and them):
Co-operation, or the association of producers, is posed independently of the
organisational capacity of capital; the co-operation and subjectivity of labour
have found a point of contact outside the machinations of capital. Capital
becomes merely an apparatus of capture, phantasm and an idol. Around it
move radically autonomous processes of self valorisation that not only constitute an alternative basis of potential development but also actually represent
a new constituent foundation. (Hardt and Negri, 1994: 282)
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 9

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 9

A number of criticisms have been raised of the notions of informational capitalism and immaterial labour. The image of a society dominated
by knowledge and information work is seen by some as too redolent of the
language used by prophets of capitalism and management gurus (DyerWitheford, 2005); it also meshes inappropriately with Bell’s (1973) liberal
formulation of post-industrial society which underpins the work of Castells
(1996) and Florida (2002). Moreover, the stubborn materiality of most work
seemingly represents a riposte to autonomist claims; just as assertions about
‘virtual society’ and the ‘death of distance’ (Cairncross, 1998; Coyle, 1998;
Quah, 1999) led to a resurgence of interest in place that highlighted the
clustering and embeddedness of Internet companies in specific locales
(English-Lueck et al., 2002; Indergaard, 2004; Perrons, 2004b; Pratt, 2000,
2002; Pratt et al., 2007), so too the emphasis upon immateriality calls for
a response that highlights the persistence of all-too-material forms of labour
– even the zeros and ones that make up the Internet’s codes have to be
written, and entered, by someone, somewhere.
A further point of critique – taken up by Hesmondhalgh and Baker
(this issue) – relates to the elision of differences within this account. While
it might be true that most work today is in some sense impacted by information and communications, the grandiosity of such a claim obscures
profound differences between different groups of workers – between, for
example, the fast food operative with a digital headset or electronic till in
their minimum wage McJob, and the highly educated, well-paid cultural
analyst. Both are touched by the ‘information revolution’, to be sure, but is
the ‘interactivity’ or ‘affectivity’ deployed in their work sufficient grounds
for treating them as similar kinds of labouring subject? Put into a global
perspective, the argument is even harder to sustain. George Caffentzis broke
with other autonomists on this issue, pointing out that Hardt and Negri’s
account was told from the perspective of male white and Northern subjects,
and accusing them of celebrating cyborgs and immaterial labour while
ignoring the contemporary renaissance of slavery: ‘the computer requires
the sweatshop, and the cyborg’s existence is premised on the slave’
(Caffentzis, 1998, cited in Dyer-Witheford, 2005: 149). This opens up the
need for a careful consideration of what relationship cultural (or creative)
workers may/may not have with ‘informational’ workers. There is already a
critical literature regarding the tendency to analytically frame manufacture
and services as a dualism (Walker, 1985). Moreover, Hesmondhalgh (2002)
stresses the importance of symbolic production to the distinction of cultural
work from other work. Finally, we need to be cautious about extrapolating
the modes and forms of activism of these groups given their different formations and orientations. Clearly, a range of empirical work is figured here.
Operaismo to Precarity
Notwithstanding these criticisms, autonomist Marxist writings have proved
attractive and inspirational to many scholars and activists eager for a
critique of, and alternative to, post-Fordist capitalism. In the last decade
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 10

10 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

precarity politics has become one of the inheritors of the Operaismo movements in which many autonomists were involved. Like the autonomist
writing discussed so far, precarity draws attention to both ‘the oppressive
face of post-Fordist capitalism’ and the ‘potentialities that spring from
workers’ own refusal of labour’ and their subjective demands (Neilson and
Rossiter, 2005: 1). The notion embodies a critique of contemporary capitalism in tandem with an optimistic sense of the potential for change. Initially
organized around struggles over labour, precarietà designated all forms of
insecure, flexible, temporary, casual, intermittent, fractional or freelance
work. Precarity became a collective platform and rallying point for the postFordist proletariat. As Neilson and Rossiter put it, in terms which echo
Negri: ‘At base was an attempt to identify or imagine precarious, contingent
or flexible workers as a new kind of political subject, replete with their own
forms of collective organization and modes of expression’ (p. 2). However,
precarity politics quickly expanded to encompass a variety of struggles,
including those relating to migration, citizenship, LBGT and feminist
movements. Activism ‘transformed precarietà from being, in the main, an
economic category addressing new forms of occupation and labour relations,
to a more open instrument of struggle, enabling resistance and the reimagination of contemporary politics, lives and subjectivities’ (Andall et al.,
2007: 4).
The precarity movement has been notable for the sheer energy and
inventiveness of its attempts to interrupt the flow of transnational capital.
Precarity activism is often ‘creative activism’ (De Sario, 2007), which uses
theatre, cinema, music and stunts to effect political change, deploys visual
tools and images extensively (Mattoni and Doerr, 2007) and also draws on
situationist-inspired strategies of ‘detournement’ (Fantone, 2007). Alongside
the mass mobilizations of the EuroMayDay demonstrations, which began in
Milan in 2001 and had spread to 18 different European cities by 2005,
actions included derives (Makeworlds Festival, 2001), precarity ping-pong
and incursions by the invented saint San Precario into supermarkets,
fashion shows and film festivals. Marcello Tari and Ilaria Vanni (2006)
document the ‘life and deeds’ of this subversive transgender saint, patron
of precarious workers, whose celebration day – on 29 February – was
designed to draw attention to casualization and flexploitation and the
takeover of life by work, and to create ‘lines of flight according to need,
personal inclination and group affiliation’ (Tari and Vanni, 2006: 6).
It is useful to think of the precarity movement as geographically and
temporally specific. Its origination in Western Europe is significant, as is its
association with the politics of 1970s Turin. As many have argued, ‘on a
global scale and in its privatized and/or unpaid versions, precarity is and
always has been the standard experience of work in capitalism’
(Mitropoulous, 2005: 5, emphasis added; see also Frassanito Network,
2006). As Neilson and Rossiter argue (this issue), it is Fordism and
Keynesianism that are the exception, both spatially and temporally, thus the
emergence of precarity movements in Western Europe may have their
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 11

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 11

foundation in the ‘relative longevity of social state models in the face of
neoliberal labour reforms’, which meant that conditions experienced by most
people, in most places, most of the time during the history of capitalism
appeared newly harsh and brutal. For the same reasons precarity politics
also (arguably) has a generational specificity, centred around people in their
twenties and thirties – the ‘precarious generation’ (Bourdieu, 1999) identified by many (Beck, 2000; Sennett, 1998) as disproportionately affected by
risk and insecurity compared to the previous generation, and with little
expectation of work security.
Some have argued that precarity politics are also temporally specific.
The precariat is to post-Fordism what the proletariat was to the industrial
age, argues Alex Foti (in Oudenampsen and Sullivan, 2004; see also Raunig,
2007). Neilson and Rossiter ‘date’ the movement more carefully, asking
whether and how its ascendance in the first few years of the 21st century
may be connected to the aftermath of the attacks on the World Trade Center
in New York and the subsequent US-led wars on Afghanistan and Iraq. Is
this timing mere coincidence or do the mobilizations around precarity tap
into more general insecurities and concerns about ‘seemingly interminable
global conflict’? (Neilson and Rossiter, 2005). This also raises questions
about the ways in which the notion may relate to Judith Butler’s (2004)
discussion of ‘precarious life’, which has been articulated as an ontological,
existential category founded in questions about who counts as human, what
is recognized as a grievable loss, and the development of relational ethics.
Might the growth of precarization also be connected to the growth and
development of the worldwide web and the huge expansion of the cultural
industries and cultural production – both areas which are characterized by
the degree to which they presume precarious labour?
Debating Precarity
Some of the objections raised to autonomist ideas have also become
animated debates within precarity politics. There has been contestation
about who best exemplifies the experience of precarity. Laura Fantone
(2007: 9) critiques what she sees as the ‘imaginary subject’ at the heart of
precarity politics: the ‘single, male, urban artist or creative worker,
idealised as the vanguard of the precariat’, who is often counterposed to
the implicitly more ‘backward’ and less radical figure of the ‘suburban
housewife’. This is tied to an accusation of both Eurocentrism and androcentrism which makes ‘different precarities’ less visible (Vishmidt, 2005).
While women have almost always done ‘immaterial and affective labour,
often with little recognition in both fields’, precariousness is only discussed
‘at the moment when the Western male worker began feeling the negative
effects of the new post-industrial flexible job market’ (Fantone, 2007: 7).
As the movement has widened in response to such criticisms, other figures
said to be emblematic of precarity include the undocumented migrant,
female care workers, or sex workers (Makeworlds Festival, 2001; Mezzadra,
2005).
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 12

12 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

Another debate concerns solidarity across difference. As a site for
mobilizations across a variety of issues, locations and experiences, the
precarity movement has sought to make connections between diverse groups
– artists and creatives, factory workers, undocumented migrants, sex
workers, students, etc. The Milan-based organization Chainworkers, for
example, attempted to organize both ‘chainworkers’ (workers in malls,
shopping centres, hypermarkets and logistics companies) and ‘brainworkers’
(members of the ‘cognitariat’, programmers and freelancers). Alex Foti (in
Oudenampsen and Sullivan, 2004) argued that while the former are always
‘on the verge of social exclusion’, the latter ‘might make above-standard
wages but if they lose their job they are thrown into poverty’ – and thus
pointed to potential solidarity between them. The appeal of the notion of
precarity is precisely in this potentiality, yet it also produces tensions
common to all forms of transversal politics: how to deal with differences,
how to find ‘common cause’, how to build solidarity while also respecting
the singularity and specificity of the very different experiences of (say)
janitors, creatives and office temps? At its best, precarity activism can be
a politics of articulation in the Gramscian (see Gramsci, 1971) sense, requiring no pure or authentic subject as its model and resisting the temptation
to collapse different experiences of precariousness into a singular form, with
a unitary cause, but rather respecting differences and articulating them in
struggle. Nevertheless, this politics of articulation (Hall, 1985, 1988, 1990;
Laclau, 1979; Laclau and Mouffe, 1985) of contingent foundations (Butler,
1992), still leaves everything to fight over. Not least is the question of
whether there are grounds for such solidarity in a global frame characterized by enormous disparities in wealth and power. Would it actually be in
the best interests of ‘the maquiladora worker to ally herself with the fashion
designer?’ asks Angela Mitropoulos (2005), pertinently. Do they have
common cause or identity of interests? What are the distinct modes of
exploitation in operation? Can their different interests be articulated? Then
there are questions about what kinds of power dynamics these very
different locations/subjectivities might produce within the movement, and
the very real challenges of building connections between actors who are
positioned in radically different ways. Mitropoulos demands:
If the exploitation and circulation of ‘cognitive’ or ‘creative labour’ consists,
as Maurizio Lazzarato argues, in the injunction to ‘be active, to communicate,
to relate to others’ and to ‘become subjects’ then how does this shape their
interactions with others, for better or worse? How does the fast food chainworker, who is compelled to be affective, compliant, and routinised, not
assume such a role in relation to the software programming ‘brainworker’,
whose habitual forms of exploitation oblige opinion, innovation and selfmanagement? (Mitropoulos, 2005: 91)

Finally, there have also been debates about the aims (and complicities) of precarity activism and, particularly, the extent to which the
movement may look to the (nation) state to attenuate the worst features of
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 13

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 13

the experience of post-Fordist capitalism. Social policies, social welfare and
public services (to the extent that they continue to exist) operate on an older
social logic which is ‘the antithesis of the speed, innovation and flexibility’
which are demanded of workers (Fantone, 2007: 6). Should the state provide
an ‘income of citizenship’ or ‘income of existence’ (Fumagalli and Lazzarato,
1999) for these precarious and insecure times? Feminist precarity activists
Sconvegno (Galetto et al., 2007) argue that the movement is situated
between on one hand deadening and obsolete calls (from older trade unions)
for a return to ‘permanent employment’ ‘all the way to your pension’, and
the spectre of ‘total lack of protection and rights’ on the other. In this context,
some have argued for a ‘social income’ or for ‘flexicurity’. For others,
however, this faith in the state is regarded as problematic, reinforcing securitization agendas and the erosion of civil liberties (particularly in the post
9/11 period). More profoundly, it is seen as resting upon a somewhat naive
understanding of state–capital relations (a position developed by Neilson
and Rossiter, this issue). Again, the issue raises significant questions for
precarity as a political project.
Precariousness, Precarity and Creative Labour
When Raymond Williams (1976) articulated his two great conceptions of
culture – one based on a hierarchy of value and the other on the more anthropological understanding of culture as ‘a way of life’ – he left little room for
consideration of cultural work (or culture as work). As Andrew Ross (Lovink
and Ross, 2007) has noted, this is not surprising given the ‘labourist’ context
in which Williams was working in 1960s and 1970s Britain; his aim was to
open up a new direction for thinking culture. Nevertheless, Williams could
not have anticipated that artists, writers, filmmakers, designers and others
would, only a few decades later, have come to take centre stage as a supposed
‘creative class’ endowed with almost mythical qualities (Florida, 2002).
As paradigms of entrepreneurial selfhood, ‘creatives’, as they are now
labelled, are the apple of the policymaker’s eye, and are recipients of the kind
of lip service usually bestowed by national managers on high-tech engineers
as generators of value. Art products are the object of intense financial speculation; cultural productions are top hit-makers in the jackpot end of the
economy; ‘cultural districts’ are posited as the key to urban New Prosperity;
and creative industries policy is embraced as the anchor of regional development by governments around the world on the lookout for a catch-up industrial plan. In the business world, creativity is viewed as a wonderstuff for
transforming workplaces into powerhouses of value, while intellectual
property – the lucrative prize of creative endeavor – is increasingly regarded
as the ‘oil of the 21st century’. (Ross, p. 32)

As Ross makes clear, creative workers and the cultural or creative industries more generally are imbued with an extraordinary range of capacities,
which relate to wealth creation, urban regeneration and social cohesion
(Gill, 2002, 2007; Pratt and Gill, 2000; Pratt et al., 2007). The notion of a
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 14

14 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

creative class has been roundly critiqued elsewhere (Peck, 2005; Pratt,
2008), as has the use of the creative industries in policy discourse, particularly in the context of the 1990s UK New Labour government (Garnham,
2005; Hesmondhalgh and Pratt, 2005; McRobbie, 1998, 1999, 2003; Pratt,
2005). Here, though, our focus is on the claims that artists and creatives
are ‘model entrepreneurs’, the ideal workers of the future.
In recent years a number of qualitative and ethnographic studies have
examined the lives of artists, fashion designers, television creatives and new
media workers, and this research has raised critical questions about the
much vaunted flexibility, autonomy and informality of these domains. A
clear and largely consistent picture of creative labour has emerged from this
research, particularly that focused on the ‘new’ micro-businesses in the
cultural industries – what Ulrich Beck (2000) refers to as ‘me and company’,
Leadbeater and Oakley (1999) dub ‘the Independents’, and Ross (2003)
explores as the ‘industrialisation of Bohemia’.
Studies have highlighted a number of relatively stable features of this
kind of work: a preponderance of temporary, intermittent and precarious
jobs; long hours and bulimic patterns of working; the collapse or erasure of
the boundaries between work and play; poor pay; high levels of mobility;
passionate attachment to the work and to the identity of creative labourer
(e.g. web designer, artist, fashion designer); an attitudinal mindset that is a
blend of bohemianism and entrepreneurialism; informal work environments
and distinctive forms of sociality; and profound experiences of insecurity
and anxiety about finding work, earning enough money and ‘keeping up’ in
rapidly changing fields (Banks, 2007; Banks and Milestone, in press; Batt
et al., 1999; Caves, 2000; Christopherson, 2002, 2003; Christopherson and
van Jaarsveld, 2005; Gill, 2002, 2007; Jarvis and Pratt, 2006; Kennedy, in
press; Kotamraju, 2002; McRobbie, 2002, 2003, 2006, 2007b; Milestone,
1997; Neff et al., 2005; O’Connor et al., 2000; Perrons, 2007; Richards and
Milestone, 2000; Ross, 2003; Taylor and Littleton, 2008a; Ursell, 2000).
Structurally, research has also pointed to the preponderance of youthful,
able-bodied people in these fields, marked gender inequalities, high levels
of educational achievement, complex entanglements of class, nationality
and ethnicity, and to the relative lack of caring responsibilities undertaken
by people involved in this kind of creative work (in ways that might lend
support to Beck’s arguments about individualization as a ‘compulsion’, the
drive in capitalism towards a moment in which subjects can work unfettered
by relationships or family; see also Adkins, 1999).
There seem to be a number of potentially productive areas of overlap
or resonance between research on cultural labour and the ideas of the Italian
autonomist school and the precarity activism discussed so far. To our mind
they coalesce around concerns with affect, temporality, subjectivity and
solidarity. Thus we will consider each of these briefly to open up some
possibilities for dialogue.

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 15

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 15

Affect
One of the most consistent findings of research on work within the creative
industries is that it is experienced by most who are involved with it as
profoundly satisfying and intensely pleasurable (at least some of the time).
A vocabulary of love is repeatedly evinced in such studies, with work
imbued with the features of the Romantic tradition of the artist, suffused
with positive emotional qualities (von Osten, 2007). Research speaks of
deep attachment, affective bindings, and to the idea of self-expression and
self-actualization through work. Indeed, such characterizations are so
common that McRobbie (forthcoming) argues that we might dub this kind
of labour ‘passionate work’.
In this context, autonomous Marxists’ emphasis upon ‘affective labour’
might be thought to offer a way of engaging with this, connecting such
emotional investments with ‘work as play’ to wider transformations within
capitalism – as well as the possibility to intervene in them. Yet does it? One
of the problems with the notion of affective labour, which was alluded to
earlier and is discussed in Hesmondhalgh and Baker’s article (in this
issue), is the bluntness and generality of its definition. Designed to improve
upon and narrow down ‘immaterial labour’, it lacks conceptual coherence
and ends up collapsing entirely different kinds of work and experience. If
all work has affective dimensions then what does it mean to say that any
particular job involves affective labour? By what criteria might we distinguish between the hospice nurse and the backroom computer programmer?
It is clear from empirical research on work in the cultural field that such
labour calls on a whole range of different kinds of affective work (Kennedy,
2008). Hesmondhalgh and Baker (this issue) attempt to unpack some of the
emotional skills and qualities involved in work on a TV production, and
they also contrast the autonomists’ focus on affective labour with
Hochschild’s (1983) earlier work on (gendered) emotional labour.
Perhaps even more troubling than the rather general conceptualization of affective labour in autonomists’ thinking is the work the notion of
‘affect’ itself is called upon to do in their account of contemporary capitalism. As in so much autonomous Marxist writing the notion has a double face
– it speaks on the one hand to the extent to which emotions, feelings,
relationships are ‘put to work’ in post-Fordist capitalism, and on the other
to the immanent human cooperative capacities and potentialities that may
be set free by such labour. However, the former assertion, we contend, is
made sotto voce in the context of their loud affirmation of the potentially
transformative and transgressive nature of affect. Affect appears largely in
its more pleasant guises – solidarity, sociality, cooperativeness, desire – and,
importantly, as (largely) always-already transgressive. What this emphasis
misses is both profoundly important to understanding cultural labour and
for their account of contemporary capitalism.
First, it occludes all the affective features of cultural labour that do
not involve affirmative feelings. It misses, for example, the fatigue, exhaustion and frustration that are well documented in studies of cultural work. It
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 16

16 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

misses also the fears (of getting left behind, of not finding work), the competitiveness, the experience of socializing not simply as pleasurable potential,
but as a compulsory means of securing future work (Gill, 2007; McRobbie,
2002; Ursell, 2000). Above all, it misses the anxiety, insecurity and individualized shame that are endemic features of fields in which you are judged
on what you produce, ‘you are only as good as your last job’, and your whole
life and sense of self is bound up with your work (Blair, 2001). These are
not incidental features of the experience of cultural labour; they are toxic,
individualized but thoroughly structural features of workplaces that include
television production companies, fashion and web design houses, and (not
least) the neoliberal university.
These (unpleasant) affective experiences –as well as the pleasures of
the work – need to be theorized to furnish a full understanding of the experience of cultural work. To be fair, sociological research (our own included)
has fallen short in this respect too, preferring to oscillate between polarized
accounts which stress different features of the experience rather than
producing an integrated understanding. But what is clear from the emerging
research is the urgency of thinking these together – a prospect which seems
to be foreclosed, rather than opened up, by the autonomists’ take on affect.
Second, these ideas rest upon a view of affect that appears baffling to
those outside the Nietzschean/Deleuzian tradition from which much autonomist writing draws. It is conjured as a pre-subjective intensity, which exists
outside signification, and can exceed power relations and break through
them, offering a glimpse of a better world, with new ways of being and
relating. Yet why, we might wonder, is affect assumed to be autonomous?
How can its essential transgressiveness be defended? How can it be said to
exist outside relations of power, as if it were sealed in some pure realm that
capitalism cannot reach to taint and corrupt? How, in sum, can it be claimed
that affect is somehow outside the social? To be sure, affects can be mobilized in anti-capitalist struggles, as Hardt and Negri have argued (see also
Terranova, 2004). Every activist involved in any kind of political organization knows this – it is about ‘hearts and minds’ after all. But this is a very
different proposition from the suggestion that affect is – somehow – alwaysalready transgressive (for alternative formulations see: Ahmed, 2004;
Berlant, 2008; Tyler, 2008a, 2008b).
In autonomist writing, affect is called upon partly to critique what is
understood as Foucault’s overemphasis on the reach and scope of power.
Hardt counterposes ‘biopower from below’ in arguing for an affective dimension which evades, resists and exceeds the new modalities of control. There
is not space here to fully elaborate a critique of this position, but we would
echo Hemmings’ powerful interrogation of the ‘affective turn’, in which she
argues that affect ‘often emerges as a rhetorical device whose ultimate goal
is to persuade “paranoid theorists” into a more productive frame of mind’
(2005: 551). Its affirmatory focus gives little space to affects which, far from
resisting or transgressing, seem to collude and reproduce. Where is the
ugliness of racism and hate crime, for example? Little space seems allowed
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 17

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 17

for affects that are normative or disciplinary, binding us into structures and
relations that may, in classical Marxist terms, not be in our real interests.
In relation to understanding cultural labour it leaves us with no way of
grappling with the role played by affect in generating consent (or even
passion) for working lives that, without this emotional and symbolic sheen,
might appear arduous, tiring and exploitative. Moreover, the autonomists’
very selective focus on affect does not help to illuminate the ‘self-exploitation’ that has been identified as a salient feature of this field (McRobbie,
2002; Ross, 2003), and in this respect Foucauldian-inflected accounts
appear more compelling in their ability to make sense of how pleasure itself
may become a disciplinary technology.
Temporality
When read through the concerns of the recent ‘turn to labour’ in cultural
studies, one of the autonomists’ most compelling arguments relates to the
takeover of life by work. This is understood by autonomist writers and
activists not through the familiar liberal notion of ‘work–life balance’ but
through the radical contention that we all exist in the ‘social factory’. ‘When
we say “work” in cognitive capitalism, we mean less and less a precise and
circumscribed part of our life, and more and more a comprehensive action’
(Morini, 2007: 44), in which the whole life experience of the worker is
harnessed to capital.
For autonomists this claim is largely understood in terms of time. Thus
it is not so much that work extends across different spaces (the home and,
with mobile devices, almost everywhere), but that the temporality of life
becomes governed by work. Papadopoulos et al. (2008) argue that precarity is a form of exploitation which operates primarily on the level of time,
evaporating distinctions between work and leisure, production and
consumption. Moreover, in the ‘participation economy’ of Web 2.0 (Rossiter,
in Delfanti, 2008) ‘free time’ becomes ‘free labour’ (Terranova, 2000) as
people produce and upload content for Facebook, Bebo and YouTube,
modify games for giant multinational corporations and leave data trails that
are ‘informational goldmines’ on Google and Safari, etc.
These arguments accord profoundly with the findings of research on
cultural work. Time emerges powerfully from such accounts as problematic
and difficult in many respects. First, much research points to the extraordinarily long working hours of cultural workers – which are often considerably in excess of working-time agreements and exert heavy costs on – or
even prohibit – relationships outside work with friends, partners, children
(in ways that are unevenly affected by gender and age). Second, research
has pointed to the significant disruption caused by stop-go ‘bulimic’ patterns
of working, in which periods with no work can give way to periods that
require intense activity, round-the-clock working, with its attendant impacts
on sleep, diet, health and social life (Gill, 2007; McRobbie, 2006, 2007b;
Perrons, 2002, 2007; Pratt, 2000). Moreover, in some industries (for
example fashion and the computer games industry) ‘crunch times’ are
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 18

18 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

becoming more and more normalized (de Peuter and Dyer-Witheford, 2006),
such that working hours previously only expected as a collection went to
show or a game came to publication become increasingly routinized as part
of the job. As McRobbie (forthcoming) argues, this gives rise to health
hazards of a different kind from the workplace accidents of industrial work:
there may be fewer burns and severed limbs, but the injuries of this highend creative labour include exhaustion, burn-out, alcohol and drug-related
problems, premature heart attacks and strokes, and a whole host of mental
and emotional disorders related to anxiety and depression (see also Gill,
2009, on the hidden injuries of the neoliberal university).
The blurring of work and non-work time is another feature of cultural
labour which seems to fit with autonomist accounts. Research shows that
many cultural workers – especially young people – frequently make no
distinction between work time and other time. However, while autonomists
tend to figure this in terms of the colonization of life and suggest refusal,
‘tarrying with time’ (Tsianos and Papadopoulos, n.d.), or Temporary
Autonomous Zones (Bey, 1985), or the slow movement (Leung, forthcoming)
as possible modes of resistance, the empirical literature points to a more
complicated and ambivalent picture. Long hours and the takeover of life by
labour may be dictated by punishing schedules and oppressive deadlines,
and may be experienced as intensely exploitative, but they may also be the
outcome of passionate engagement, creativity and self-expression, and opportunities for socializing in fields in which ‘networking’ is less about ‘schmoozing’ the powerful than ‘chilling’ with friends, co-workers and people who
share similar interests and enthusiasms. Not all cultural workers, it seems,
share Hardt and Negri’s critique of productivism! Sometimes networking may
be ‘compulsory sociality’ (Gregg, 2008) required to survive in a field; at other
times it may be pleasurable ‘hanging out’ (Pratt, 2006). Often, of course, it is
both. It seems to us that the meanings which cultural workers give to this
should be central – and this is one area where a productive dialogue could
be established between autonomism and sociological work on cultural labour.
Subjectivity
As we noted at the start of this article, one of the things that distinguishes
the work of Lazzarato, Hardt, Negri, Virno and others from much other social
theory – including other Marxist writing – is its emphasis upon subjectivity.
Perhaps more than any other body of scholarship it has been concerned to
connect changes in the organization of capitalism to transformations in
subjectivity, and this represents, in our view, a bold and important project
which resonates with and complements the research of some sociologists
and critical psychologists – particularly those concerned with the subjectivities demanded by contemporary neoliberal capitalism (Brown, 2003;
McRobbie, 2007a, 2007b; Rose, 1990; Walkerdine et al., 2001).
Yet there are tensions within autonomist thinking about subjectivity,
which relate – like those around affect – to the productive and affirmatory
focus of their work. On the one hand there is a concern with capitalism’s
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 19

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 19

attempt to exercise control over not simply workers’ bodies and productive
capacities but over their subjectivity as well. Lazzarato (1996: 135) contends
that ‘the new slogan of Western societies is that we should all “become
subjects”’. He argues: ‘Participative management is a technology of power,
a technology for creating and controlling “subjective processes”.’ This
seems to accord with a Foucaultian tradition of analysis interested in new
forms of governmentality (Miller and Rose, 2008).
On the other hand, however, autonomist writers are concerned to stress
emergent subjectivities, the possibilities of resistance, the features of
subjectivity that exceed capitalist control and regulation. They argue that
one’s subjectivity does not arise from one’s position in the class structure
but is produced when the contemporary regime of labour becomes embodied
experience: subjectivity is not a facticity, it is an imperceptible departure
(Papadopoulos et al., 2008). The point of departure of the new social subject
is not immaterial production as such but its materialization in the subject’s
flesh (Negri, 2003).
We would contend, however, that subjectivity is always mediated by
the meanings which people give to their experience – even ‘materialization
in the flesh’ (which we would understand as embodied ways of knowing) is
not, in our view, outside culture. Thus, to understand emergent subjectivities, to understand what Marx would have thought of as the difference
between a class in itself and class for itself, centrally requires attention to
the meanings cultural workers themselves give to their life and work – not
merely, we must stress, for the sake of sociological completeness, but in
order to found a political project. Without this, how to account for not only
the refusals, but also the compliance, the lack of refusal? To put it back to
autonomist writers in a more Deleuzian-infused language, we need to understand not only the possible becomings, but also the not-becomings.
Moreover, these tensions generate issues similar to those we raised
about affect: namely, how is it that parts of subjectivity can resist, evade or
exceed capitalist colonization? In addition, they point to a fundamental
epistemological question: if contemporary forms of capitalist organization
demand ‘cooperativeness’, ‘participation’, ‘creativity’ and other practices
that are also – simultaneously – said to be features of an elementary spontaneous communism, then how can one distinguish between those instances
that might make capitalists quake in their boots and those which are indices
(on the contrary) of capitalism’s penetration of workers’ very souls? By what
kinds of principled criteria might we differentiate between the radically
different meanings of apparently similar practices? These are important
questions that autonomist writing does not seem to resolve.
Solidarity
Finally, however, it seems to us that one of the most important – yet largely
implicit – contributions that autonomists’ thinking and precarity activism
might make to this field is in putting questions of cultural labour, political
economy and social justice on the agenda. The lack of trade unionization
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 20

20 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

and labour organization in many areas of cultural work is striking, and is
both cause and outcome of industries that are individualized, deregulated
and reliant upon cheap or even free labour, with working hours and
conditions (particularly among freelancers and intermittents) that are largely
beyond scrutiny.
This situation has been scandalously ignored by the academic fields
of media and cultural studies, which have – with notable exceptions –
woefully neglected cultural production, or at times have become caught up
in the hyperbole of fields such as web design or fashion, believing their
myths of ‘coolness, creativity and egalitarianism’ (Gill, 2002). In the context
of the silence from most scholars about cultural labour, autonomist thinking
and activism makes a major contribution in focusing on the role of work in
capitalism and drawing attention to processes of precarization and individualization. Moreover, in resisting a purely sociological account in favour of
an emphasis upon the political potentials of immaterial labour, this work
points to the possibility of change, of re-imagining life and labour, of
creating new forms of solidarity.
Conclusion
This article has examined the contribution that autonomous Marxism has
made to theorizing the experience of ‘immaterial’ cultural labour in postFordist capitalism, and has pointed to the new forms and practices of politics
that are mobilized around the precariousness that is said to be a defining
feature of contemporary life. Autonomous Marxist ideas have provided
inspiration to many seeking a principled left critique of contemporary capitalism, and their ambition and sweep is little short of extraordinary. The
ideas have restored a dynamism to accounts of capitalism and accorded
workers a leading role in effecting change, with an affirmatory emphasis on
the potentialities created by new forms of labour. The focus on the dispersal of work beyond the factory gate and the dissemination of capitalist
relations throughout the ‘social factory’ makes a major contribution to social
theory, and the autonomist attention to subjectivity and to new or potential
solidarities is also valuable.
In this article we have brought autonomist writings together with activist
ideas about precarity as a key feature of contemporary experience. For some,
the figure of the artist or creative worker has been emblematic of the experience of precarity: negotiating short-term, insecure, poorly paid, precarious
work in conditions of structural uncertainty. As we have noted, however, this
is contested and precarity might be better thought of as a political rallying
point for a diverse range of struggles about labour, migration and citizenship.
When juxtaposed with the growing body of empirical research on
cultural work, however, the autonomist tradition has both added insights and
thrown up tensions. The notions of ‘immaterial labour’ and ‘affective labour’
that are so central to this work are rather ill-defined and not sharp enough
to see the ways in which cultural work is both like and not like other work.
Moreover, the emphasis upon affect as positive, transgressive potential has
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 21

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 21

made it difficult for autonomist writers to see the other roles affect may play
– not simply in resisting capital but binding us to it. A fuller understanding needs to grasp both pleasure and pain, and their relation to forms of
exploitation that increasingly work through dispersed disciplinary modalities and technologies of subjecthood.
The autonomist and activist focus on refusal and resistance raises
questions about the relative absence of labour organization within many
cultural workplaces (the film industry being an obvious exception), and this
represents a significant contribution. However, to understand this requires
a closer analysis than the autonomists provide – one that can engage with
the specificities of different industries, workplaces and locations, and attend
to the meanings that workers themselves give to their labour. To argue this
is not to reinstate ‘mere’ sociology against the autonomists’ explicitly political engagement (though we are not so happy with the ‘mere’) but to argue,
on the contrary (and with a debt to Marx), that this emphasis is necessary
not only to understand but also to change the world.
Acknowledgements
This special section arose out of a meeting on cultural work and precariousness,
organized by the authors and held at the London School of Economics in March
2007. We would like to thank all the participants for their stimulating contributions,
and gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the ESRC (award number RES341–25–005) in making it possible. Thanks are also due to Roger Burrows, Geert
Lovink and Angela McRobbie for their enthusiastic support of the broader project
on which this is based. In an unusual step, we would also like to express our
appreciation to Nick Dyer-Witheford and Kathi Weeks, whose readings of
Autonomía have influenced and refined our own understanding. Thanks also go to
Nick Gane and others at Theory, Culture & Society for their work in editing this
special section. Finally, our particular thanks go to Dave Hesmondhalgh, Brett
Neilson, Ned Rossiter and Stephanie Taylor for generously taking time to give
helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article.
References
Adkins, L. (1999) ‘Community and Economy: A Re-traditionalization of Gender?’,
Theory, Culture & Society 16(1): 119–39.
Aglietta, M. (1979) A Theory of Capitalist Regulation: The US Experience. London:
New Left Books.
Ahmed, S. (2004) The Cultural Politics of Emotion. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Allen, J. and N. Henry (1997) ‘Ulrich Beck’s “Risk Society” at Work: Labour and
Employment in the Contract Service Industries’, Transactions of the Institute of
British Geographers 22(2): 180–96.
Andall, J., N. Puwar and the Italian Group (2007) ‘Editorial: Italian Feminisms’,
Feminist Review 87: 1–4.
Banks, M. (2007) The Politics of Cultural Work. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Banks, M. and K. Milestone (in press, 2009) ‘Individualization, Gender and
Cultural Work’, Gender, Work and Organization.
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 22

22 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)
Batt, R., S. Christopherson and N. Rightor (1999) Net-working: Working Life in a
Project-based Industry: A Collaborative Study of People Working in New Media in
New York. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Bauman, Z. (2000) Liquid Modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bauman, Z. (2005) Liquid Life. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Beck, A. (2003) Cultural Work: Understanding the Cultural Industries. London:
Routledge.
Beck, U. (2000) The Brave New World of Work. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Beck, U. and M. Ritter (1992) Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London:
SAGE.
Beck, U., J. Van Loon and B. Adam (2000) The Risk Society and Beyond: Critical
Issues for Social Theory. London: SAGE.
Bell, D. (1973) The Coming of Post-industrial Society. New York: Basic Books.
Berlant, L.G. (2008) The Female Complaint: The Unfinished Business of Sentimentality in American Culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Bey, H. (1985) TAZ: The Temporary Autonomous Zone: Ontological Anarchy, Poetic
Terrorism. New York: Autonomedia.
Blair, H. (2001) ‘“You’re Only as Good as Your Last Job”: The Labour Process and
Labour Market in the British Film Industry’, Work, Employment and Society 15(1):
149–69.
Blair, H. (2003) ‘Winning and Losing in Flexible Labour Markets: The Formation
and Operation of Networks of Interdependence in the UK Film Industry’, Sociology – The Journal of the British Sociological Association 37(4): 677–94.
Blair, H., N. Culkin and K. Randle (2003) ‘From London to Los Angeles: A
Comparison of Local Labour Market Processes in the US and UK Film Industries’,
International Journal of Human Resource Management 14(4): 619–33.
Boltanski, L. and E. Chiapello (2005) The New Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso.
Bourdieu, P. (1999) ‘Job Insecurity Is Everywhere Now’, in Acts of Resistance:
Against the Tyranny of the Market, trans. R. Nice. New York: New Books.
Brown, W. (2003) ‘Neo-liberalism and the End of Liberal Democracy’, Theory &
Event 7(1): 1–19.
Butler, J. (1992) ‘Contingent Foundations’, in J.W. Scott and J. Butler (eds) Feminists Theorize the Political. London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (2004) Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence. London:
Verso.
Cairncross, F. (1998) The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution
Will Change Our Lives. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Castells, M. (1996) The Rise of the Network Society. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell
Publishers.
Caves, R.E. (2000) Creative Industries: Contracts between Art and Commerce.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Christopherson, S. (2002) ‘Project Work in Context: Regulatory Change and the New
Geography of Media’, Environment and Planning A 34(11): 2003–15.
Christopherson, S. (2003) ‘The Limits to “New Regionalism”: (Re)Learning from
the Media Industries’, Geoforum 34(4): 413–15.
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 23

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 23
Christopherson, S. and D. van Jaarsveld (2005) ‘New Media after the dot.com bust:
The Persistent Influence of Political Institutions on Work in the Cultural Industries’, International Journal of Cultural Policy 11(1): 77–94.
Cleaver, H. (2000) Reading Capital Politically. Edinburgh: AK Press.
Coyle, D. (1998) The Weightless Economy. London: Capstone.
Debord, G. (1994) The Society of the Spectacle. New York: Zone Books.
Delfanti, A (2008) ‘The Challenge of Working at the Time of Network: Interview
with Ned Rossiter’, Il Manifesto 1 May, URL (consulted June 2008): http://
www.ilmanifesto.it/argomenti-settimana/articolo_43169543799d495da0c8deecbdea
8c2d.html
Del Re, A. (2005) ‘Feminism and Autonomy: Itinerary of Struggle’, pp. 48–72 in
T.S. Murphy and A.-K. Mustapha (eds) Resistance in Practice: The Philosophy of
Antonio Negri. London: Pluto Press.
de Peuter, G. and N. Dyer-Witheford (2006) ‘A Playful Multitude? Mobilising and
Counter-mobilising Immaterial Game Labour’, Fibreculture 5.
De Sario, B. (2007) ‘“Precari su Marte”: An Experiment in Activism against Precarity’, Feminist Review 87: 21–39.
Deuze, M. (2007) Media Work. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Dyer-Witheford, N. (2005) ‘Cyber-Negri: General Intellect and Immaterial Labor’,
pp. 136–62 in T.S. Murphy and A.-K. Mustapha (eds) Resistance in Practice: The
Philosophy of Antonio Negri. London: Pluto Press.
Ehrenstein, A. (2006) ‘Social Relationality and Affective Experience in Precarious
Labour Conditions’, unpublished MRes. thesis, Dept. of Social Psychology, Cardiff
University.
English-Lueck, J.A., C.N. Darrah and A. Savari (2002) ‘Trusting Strangers: Work
Relationships in Four High-tech Communities’, Information, Communication &
Society 5: 90–108.
Fantone, L. (2007) ‘Precarious Changes: Gender and Generational Politics in
Contemporary Italy’, Feminist Review 87: 5–20.
Flores, F. and J. Gray (2000) Entrepreneurship and the Wired Life: Work in the Wake
of Careers. London: Demos
Florida, R.L. (2002) The Rise of the Creative Class: And How It’s Transforming Work,
Leisure, Community and Everyday Life. New York: Basic Books.
Frassanito Network (2006) ‘Movements and Struggles of Migration’, URL (consulted
October 2008): http://thistuesday.org/node/130
Fumagalli, A. and M. Lazzarato (1999) Tutte bianche. Rome: Derive Approdi.
Galetto, M., C. Lasala, S. Magaraggia, C. Martiucci, O. Elsabetta and F. Pozzi (2007)
‘A Snapshot of Precariousness: Voices, Perspectives, Dialogues’, Feminist Review
87: 104–12.
Garnham, N. (1987) ‘Concepts of Culture – Public Policy and the Cultural
Industries’, Cultural Studies 1(1): 23–37.
Garnham, N. (2005) ‘From Cultural to Creative Industries: An Analysis of the
Implications of the “Creative Industries” Approach to Arts and Media Policy
Making in the United Kingdom’, International Journal of Cultural Policy 11(1):
15–30.
Gill, R.C. (2002) ‘Cool, Creative and Egalitarian? Exploring Gender in
Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 24

24 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)
Project-based New Media Work in Europe’, Information, Communication & Society
5(1): 70–89.
Gill, R.C. (2007) Technobohemians or the New Cybertariat? New Media Work in
Amsterdam a Decade after the Web, Network Notebooks. Amsterdam: Institute of
Network Cultures.
Gill, R.C. (in press, 2009) ‘Secrecy, Silence, Toxic Shame and the Hidden Injuries
of the Neo-liberal University’, in R. Flood and R.C. Gill (eds) Secrecy and Silence
in the Research Process: Feminist Reflections. London: Routledge.
Gottschall, K. and D. Kroos (2007) ‘Self-employment in Comparative Perspectives:
General Trends and the Case of New Media’, in C. Fagan, L. McDowell, D. Perrons,
K. Ray and K. Ward (eds) Gender Divisions in the New Economy: Changing Patterns
of Work, Care and Public Policy in Europe and North America. London: Edward
Elgar.
Gramsci, A. (1971) Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci, ed.
and trans. Q. Hoare and G. Nowell-Smith. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Gregg, M. (2008) ‘Testing the Friendship: Feminism and the Limits of Online Social
Networks’, Feminist Media Studies 8(2): 197–223.
Hall, S. (1985) ‘Authoritarian Populism: A Reply to Jessop et al.’, New Left Review
151: 115–22.
Hall, S. (1988) ‘The Toad in the Garden: Thatcherism among the Theorists’, in
C. Nelson and L. Grossberg (eds) Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture.
Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Hall, S. (1990) ‘Minimal Selves’, Identity Documents 6: 44–6.
Hardt, M. (2005) ‘Into the Factory: Negri’s Lenin and the Subjective Caesura
(1968–1973)’, pp. 7–37 in T.S. Murphy and A.-K. Mustapha (eds) Resistance in
Practice: The Philosophy of Antonio Negri. London: Pluto Press.
Hardt, M. and A. Negri (1994) Labor of Dionysus: A Critique of State-form.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hardt, M. and A. Negri (2000) Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Hardt, M. and A. Negri (2004) Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire.
New York: Penguin Press.
Harvey, D. (1988) The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of
Cultural Change. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Hemmings, C. (2005) ‘Invoking Affect: Cultural Theory and the Ontological Turn’,
Cultural Studies 19(5): 548–67.
Hesmondhalgh, D. (2002) The Cultural Industries. London: SAGE.
Hesmondhalgh, D. (2007) ‘Creative Labour as a Basis for a Critique of Creative
Industries Policy’, pp. 59–68 in G. Lovink and N. Rossiter (eds) My Creativity
Reader: A Critique of the Creative Industries. Amsterdam: Institute of Network
Cultures.
Hesmondhalgh, D. and A.C. Pratt (2005) ‘Cultural Industries and Cultural Policy’,
International Journal of Cultural Policy 11(1): 1–14.
Hochschild, A.R. (1983) The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human
Feeling. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 25

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 25
Hyman, J., C. Baldry, D. Scholarios and D. Bunzel (2003) ‘Work–Life Imbalance
in the New Service Sector Economy’, British Journal of Industrial Relations 41(2):
215–39.
Indergaard, M. (2004) Silicon Alley: The Rise and Fall of a New Media District.
New York: Routledge.
Jameson, F. (1991) Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.
London: Verso.
Jarvis, H. and A.C. Pratt (2006) ‘Bringing It All Back Home: The Extensification
and “Overflowing” of Work. The Case of San Francisco’s New Media Households’,
Geoforum 37(3): 331–39.
Jeffcutt, P. and A.C. Pratt (2002) ‘Managing Creativity in the Cultural Industries’,
Creativity and Innovation Management 11(4): 225–33.
Jones, C. (1996) ‘Careers in Project Networks: The Case of the Film Industry’, in
M.B. Arthur and D.M. Rousseau (eds) The Boundaryless Career. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kennedy, H. (in press) ‘Going the Extra Mile: Emotional and Commercial Imperatives in New Media Work’, Convergence: The International Journal of Research into
New Media.
Kotamraju, N. (2002) ‘Keeping Up: Web Design Skill and the Reinvented Worker’,
Information, Communication & Society 5(1): 1–26.
Laclau, E. (1979) Politics and Ideology in Marxist Theory: Capitalism – Fascism –
Populism. London: Verso.
Laclau, E. and C. Mouffe (1985) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a
Radical Democratic Politics. London: Verso.
Lash, S. and J. Urry (1993) Economies of Signs and Space. London: SAGE.
Lazzarato, M. (1996) ‘Immaterial Labour’, pp. 133–47 in M. Hardt and P. Virno
(eds) Radical Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Lazzarato, M. (2007) ‘The Misfortunes of the “Artistic Critique” and of Cultural
Employment’, URL (consulted September 2008): http://roundtable.kein.org/http:/
%252Feipcp.net/transversal/0207/lazzarato/en
Leadbeater, C. and K. Oakley (1999) The New Independents – Britain’s New Cultural
Entrepreneurs. London: Demos.
Leung, L. (forthcoming) ‘The Slow Movement’.
Lipietz, A. (1992) Towards a New Economic Order: Post-Fordism, Ecology and
Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Lovink, G. (2007) ‘Organic Intellectual Work: Interview with Andrew Ross’, 11 July,
URL (consulted September 2008): http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/geert/interviewwith-andrew-ross
Lovink, G. and N. Rossiter (2007) My Creativity Reader: A Critique of the Creative
Industries. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
McDowell, L. (2004) ‘Work, Workfare, Work/Life Balance and an Ethic of Care’,
Progress in Human Geography 28(2): 145–63.
McRobbie, A. (1998) British Fashion Design: Rag Trade or Image Industry?
London: Routledge.

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 26

26 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)
McRobbie, A. (1999) In the Culture Society: Art, Fashion, and Popular Music.
London: Routledge.
McRobbie, A. (2002) ‘From Holloway to Hollywood: Happiness at Work in the New
Cultural Economy’, pp. 97–114 in P. du Gay and M. Pryke (eds) Cultural Economy.
London: SAGE.
McRobbie, A. (2003) ‘Club to Company’, Cultural Studies 16(4): 516–31.
McRobbie, A. (2006) ‘Creative London – Creative Berlin’, September, URL
(consulted September 2008): http://www.ateliereuropa.com/2.3_essay.php
McRobbie, A. (2007a) ‘Top Girls?’, Cultural Studies 21(4): 718–37.
McRobbie, A. (2007b) ‘The Los Angelisation of London: Three Short-waves of
Young People’s Micro-economies of Culture and Creativity in the UK’, transversal,
URL (consulted September 2008): http://eipcp.net/transversal/0207/mcrobbie/en
McRobbie, A. (forthcoming) ‘Women as Multitude? Notes on Feminism and
Immaterial Labour’ (mimeograph available from author).
Makeworlds Festival (2001) ‘Precarias: First Stutterings of Precarias a la Deriva’
(Precarious Women Workers Adrift), URL (consulted October 2008): http://
www.makeworlds.org/node/61
Markusen, A. and G. Schrock (2006) ‘The Artistic Dividend: Urban Artistic
Specialisation and Economic Development Implications’, Urban Studies 43(10):
1661–86.
Mattoni, A. and N. Doerr (2007) ‘Images within the Precarity Movement in Italy’,
Feminist Review 87: 130–5.
Mayerhofer, E. and M. Mokre (2007) ‘The Creative Industries in Austria: The
Glories of the Past vs. the Uncertainties of the Present’, pp. 141–50 in G. Lovink
and N. Rossiter (eds) My Creativity Reader: A Critique of the Creative Industries.
Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
Mezzadra, S. (2005) Derecha de Fuga: Migraciones, Ciudadania, y Global. Madrid:
Proyecto Editorial Traficantes de Suenos.
Miege, B. (1989) The Capitalization of Cultural Production. New York: International
General.
Milestone, K. (1997) ‘Love Factory: The Sites, Practices and Media Relationships
of Northern Soul’, in S. Redhead, J. O’Connor and D. Wynne (eds) The Clubcultures
Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.
Miller, P. and N.S. Rose (2008) Governing the Present: Administering Economic,
Social and Personal Life. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Mitropoulous, A. (2005) ‘Precari-us’, Mute: Culture and Politics after the Net 1(29):
88–96.
Morini, C. (2007) ‘The Feminisation of Labour in Cognitive Capitalism’, Feminist
Review 87: 40–59.
Murphy, T.S. and A.-K. Mustapha (2005a) ‘Introduction: The Real Movement and
the Present State of Things’, pp. 1–6 in T.S. Murphy and A.-K. Mustapha (eds)
Resistance in Practice: The Philosophy of Antonio Negri. London: Pluto Press.
Murphy, T.S. and A.-K. Mustapha (2005b) Resistance in Practice: The Philosophy
of Antonio Negri. London: Pluto Press.

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 27

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 27
Neff, G., E. Wissinger and S. Zukin (2005) ‘Entrepreneurial Labour among Cultural
Producers: “Cool” Jobs in “Hot” Industries’, Social Semiotics 15(3): 307–34.
Negri, A. (1973) ‘Partiti operaio contro il lavora’, in S. Bologna, P. Carpignaro and
A. Negri (eds) Crisi e organizzazione operaia. Milan: Feltrinelli.
Negri, A. (1979) ‘Capitalist Domination and Working-class Sabotage’, pp. 92–137
in Working-class Autonomy and the Crisis. London: Red Notes.
Negri, A. (1989) The Politics of Subversion: A Manifesto for the Twenty-first Century.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Negri, A. (2003) ‘Kairos, Alma Venus, Multitudo: Nine Lessons to Myself’,
pp. 137–298 in A. Negri (ed.) Time for Revolution. New York: Continuum.
Neilson, B. and N. Rossiter (2005) ‘From Precarity to Precariousness and Back
Again: Labour, Life and Unstable Networks’, Fibreculture 5.
O’Connor, J., M. Banks, A. Lovatt and C. Raffo (2000) ‘Risk and Trust in the
Cultural Industries’, Geoforum 31(4): 453–64.
Oudenampsen, M. and G. Sullivan (2004) ‘Precarity and N/european Identity: An
Interview with Alex Foti’, July, URL (consulted September 2008): http://
www.wombles.org.uk/article200610240.php
Papadopoulos, D., N. Stephenson and V. Tsianos (2008) Escape Routes: Control and
Subversion in the 21st Century. London: Pluto Press.
Peck, J. (2005) ‘Struggling with the Creative Class’, International Journal of Urban
and Regional Research 29(4): 740–70.
Perrons, D. (1999) ‘Flexible Working Patterns and Equal Opportunities in the
European Union: Conflict or Compatibility?’, European Journal of Women’s Studies
6: 391–418.
Perrons, D. (2002) ‘The New Economy, Labour Market Inequalities and the
Work–Life Balance’, pp. 129–48 in R. Martin and P. Morrison (eds) Geographies of
Labour Market Inequality. London: Routledge.
Perrons, D. (2003) ‘The New Economy and the Work–Life Balance. A Case Study
of the New Media Sector in Brighton and Hove’, Gender, Work & Organization 10(1):
65–93.
Perrons, D. (2004a) ‘Equity and Representation in the New Economy’, in J. Kelly
and P. Willman (eds) Union Organization and Activity. London: Routledge.
Perrons, D. (2004b) ‘Understanding Social and Spatial Divisions in the New
Economy: New Media Clusters and the Digital Divide’, Economic Geography 80(1):
45–61.
Perrons, D. (2007) ‘Living and Working Patterns in the New Knowledge Economy:
New Opportunities and Old Social Divisions in the Case of New Media and Care
Work’, in C. Fagan, L. McDowell, D. Perrons, K. Ray and K. Ward (eds) Gender
Divisions in the New Economy: Changing Patterns of Work, Care and Public Policy
in Europe and North America. London: Edward Elgar.
Pink, D.H. (2001) Free Agent Nation: How America’s New Independent Workers Are
Transforming the Way We Live. New York: Warner Books.
Piore, M.J. and C.F. Sabel (1984) The Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities for
Prosperity. New York: Basic Books.

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 28

28 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)
Pratt, A.C. (2000) ‘New Media, the New Economy and New Spaces’, Geoforum
31(4): 425–36.
Pratt, A.C. (2002) ‘Hot Jobs in Cool Places: The Material Cultures of New Media
Product Spaces: The Case of the South of Market, San Francisco’, Information,
Communication & Society 5(1): 27–50.
Pratt, A.C. (2005) ‘Cultural Industries and Public Policy: An Oxymoron?’, International Journal of Cultural Policy 11(1): 31–44.
Pratt, A.C. (2006) ‘Advertising and Creativity, a Governance Approach: A Case
Study of Creative Agencies in London’, Environment and Planning A 38(10):
1883–99.
Pratt, A.C. (2007) ‘The State of the Cultural Economy: The Rise of the Cultural
Economy and the Challenges to Cultural Policy Making’, pp. 166–90 in A. Ribeiro
(ed.) The Urgency of Theory. Manchester: Carcanet Press/Gulbenkian Foundation.
Pratt, A.C. (2008) ‘Creative Cities: The Cultural Industries and the Creative Class’,
Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 90(2): 107–17.
Pratt, A.C. and R.C. Gill (2000) New Media Centre User-networks. London: Arts
Council of England.
Pratt, A.C., R.C. Gill and V. Spelthann (2007) ‘Work and the City in the E-society:
A Critical Investigation of the Socio-spatially Situated Character of Economic
Production in the Digital Content Industries, UK’, Information, Communication &
Society 10(6): 921–41.
Quah, D. (1999) The Weightless Economy in Economic Development. Centre for
Economic Performance Discussion Paper no. 417. London: London School of
Economics and Political Science.
Raunig, G. (2007) Art and Revolution: Transversal Activism in the Long Twentieth
Century. Cambridge, MA: Semiotext(e).
Reich, R.B. (2000) The Future of Success. New York: A. Knopf.
Richards, N. and K. Milestone (2000) ‘What Difference Does It Make? Women’s
Pop Cultural Production and Consumption in Manchester’, Sociological Research
Online 5, URL (consulted September 2008): http://www.socresonline.org.uk/5/1/
richards.html
Rose, N.S. (1990) Governing the Soul: The Shaping of the Private Self. London:
Routledge.
Ross, A. (2003) No-collar: The Humane Workplace and Its Hidden Costs. New York:
Basic Books.
Sennett, R. (1998) The Corrosion of Character. New York: Norton.
Sennett, R. (2006) The Culture of the New Capitalism. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Tari, M. and I. Vanni (2006) ‘On the Life and Seeds of San Precario: Patron Saint
of Precarious Workers and Lives’, Fibreculture Journal 5, URL (consulted October
2008): http://journal.fibreculture.org/issue5/vanni_tari
Taylor, S. and K. Littleton (2008a) ‘Art Work or Money: Conflicts in the Construction of a Creative Identity’, Sociological Review 56: 275–92.
Taylor, S. and K. Littleton (2008b) Creative Careers and Non-traditional Trajectories.
London: National Arts Learning Network.

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 29

Gill & Pratt – In the Social Factory? 29
Terranova, T. (2000) ‘Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy’,
Social Text 18(2): 33–58.
Terranova, T. (2004) Network Culture: Politics for the Information Age. London:
Pluto Press.
Tronti, M. (1966) Operai e capitale (Workers and capital). Turin: Einaudi.
Tyler, I. (2008a) ‘“Chav Mum, Chav Scum”: Class Disgust in Contemporary Britain’,
Feminist Media Studies 8(1): 17–34.
Tyler, I. (2008b) ‘Methodological Fatigue: The Politics of the “Affective Turn”’,
Feminist Media Studies 8(1): 85–90.
Ursell, G. (2000) ‘Television Production: Issues of Exploitation, Commodification
and Subjectivity in UK Television Markets’, Media, Culture & Society 22(6):
805–25.
Vaneigem, R. (1972) The Revolution of Everyday Life. London: Left Bank Distribution.
Virno, P. (1996) ‘Virtuosity and Revolution: The Political Theory of Exodus’,
pp. 189–209 in P. Virno and M. Hardt (eds) Radical Thought in Italy: A Potential
Politics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Virno, P. and M. Hardt (1996) Radical Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Virno, P., I. Bertoletti, J. Cascaito and A. Casson (2004) A Grammar of the Multitude: For an Analysis of Contemporary Forms of Life. Los Angeles, CA: Semiotext(e).
Vishmidt, M. (2005) ‘Precarious Straits’, Mute: The Precarious Issue 29: 93–5.
von Osten, M. (2007) ‘Unpredictable Outcomes: A Reflection after Some Years of
Debates on Creativity and Creative Industries’, pp. 49–58 in G. Lovink and
N. Rossiter (eds) My Creativity Reader: A Critique of the Creative Industries.
Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
Walker, R.A. (1985) ‘Is There a Service Economy? The Changing Capitalist Division
of Labor’, Science & Society 49(1): 42–83.
Walkerdine, V., H. Lucey and J. Melody (2001) Growing Up Girl: Psychosocial
Explorations of Gender and Class. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Webster, J. (2004) Working and Living in the European Knowledge Society: The
Policy Implications of Developments in Working Life and Their Effects on Social
Relations. Dublin: Employment Research Centre, Department of Sociology, Trinity
College.
Weeks, K. (2005) ‘The Refusal of Work as Demand and Perspective’, pp. 109–35
in T.S. Murphy and A.-K. Mustapha (eds) Resistance in Practice: The Philosophy of
Antonio Negri. London: Pluto Press.
Williams, R. (1976) Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. London:
Fontana.

Rosalind Gill has worked at Goldsmiths College and the London School of
Economics, and is currently Professor of Subjectivity and Cultural Theory
in the Faculty of Social Sciences, Open University. She is author of
numerous books and articles on gender, media and new technologies and

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

001-030 097794 Gill (D)

3/12/08

14:07

Page 30

30 Theory, Culture & Society 25(7–8)

has recently been doing research on cultural labour. Since the early 1980s
she has been involved in anarchist, feminist and libertarian-socialist
activism in a wide range of anti-capitalist struggles. She lives in London.
Andy Pratt is Reader in Urban Cultural Economy at the London School of
Economics. He has written extensively about the concepts, theories and
practices of the cultural industries and cultural economy. His empirical
work has been carried out in North America, several European countries,
West Africa, Japan and Australia. He has published across several disciplinary areas in the academic field. He has also made direct interventions
to policy debates at local, national and international levels in both governmental and non-governmental spheres.

Downloaded from tcs.sagepub.com at Lancaster University Library on October 1, 2014

